<title>
Miglustat (NB-DNJ) works as a chaperone for mutated acid beta-glucosidase in cells transfected with several Gaucher disease mutations.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Gaucher disease (GD) is a disorder of glycosphinglipid metabolism caused by deficiency of lysosomal acid beta-glucosidase (GC), resulting in progressive deposition of glucosylceramide in macrophages. The glucose analogue, N-butyl-deoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ, Miglustat), is an inhibitor of the ceramide-specific glucosyltransferase (CSG) which catalyzes the first step of glycosphingolipids biosynthesis and is currently approved for the oral treatment of type 1 GD. Using site-directed mutagenesis, we constructed plasmids containing wild-type and several mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene. The plasmids were transfected into COS-7 cells and stable transfected cell lines were obtained by geneticin (G418) selection. Cells were cultured during 6 days with medium with or without 10 microM NB-DNJ. The addition of NB-DNJ to COS-7 cell medium leads to 1.3-, 2.1-, 2.3-, 3.6-, and 9.9-fold increase in the activity of S364R, wild-type, N370S, V15M, and M123T GC, respectively. However, no significant changes were observed in the activity of the L444P, L336P, and S465del mutated proteins, but a small decrease in the rare P266L variant was observed. These results suggest that NB-DNJ, in addition to the inhibitory effect on CSG, also works as a "chemical chaperone", increasing the activity of acid beta-glucosidase of wild-type and several GC mutated proteins, including the most frequent N370S mutation. The specific location of the Miglustat binding site in GC is unknown. Potential binding sites in the enzyme have been searched for using computational molecular docking. The searching strategy identified three potential GC binding sites for Miglustat, one being the substrate-binding site of the enzyme, which was the best-ranked site by AutoDock program. Therefore, it is possible that Miglustat exerts its chaperoning activity on acid beta-glucosidase by acting as an inhibitor bound at the active site. This increase on the activity of the acid beta-glucosidase would imply that Miglustat is not only a substrate reducer but also an inhibitor of the GC degradation, with very promising clinical implications for the treatment of GD patients.
</abstract>

</text>
