<title>
Development of endometrial carcinoma in a patient with leprechaunism (donohue syndrome).
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Leprechaunism is a rare autosomal recessive disease that is characterized by severe insulin resistance. This disease is caused by a defective insulin receptor and features abnormal glucose metabolism and retarded intrauterine and postnatal growth. However, there are few reports on the long-term course of leprechaunism. We reported the long-term clinical course and rh-IGF-1 treatment in a patient with leprechaunism. During follow-up her diabetes gradually deteriorated despite of treatment of rh-IGF-1. Furthermore, she developed endometrioid adenocarcinoma at the age of 24 yr. The development of endometrial disease must be carefully followed up in this disease.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
eprechaunism is a rare autosomal recessive disease that is characterized by severe insulin
resistance (1,2,3). his disease is caused by a defective
insulin receptor and features abnormal glucose metabolism and retarded intrauterine and
postnatal growth (1,2,3,4).
nsulin-like growth factor  (-), a 70-amino acid polypeptide with extensive,
structural homology to insulin (48%), exerts its biological effects by binding to -1
receptor (-1), , or -1/ hybrid receptor on the surface of target cells (3, 5, 6). t is well known that the insulin and -1 receptors
are structurally related and share common post-receptor signaling pathways (5, 6). herefore,
exogenous administration of recombinant human -1 (rh--1) has been used in patients
with leprechaunism (3, 7,8,9,10,11). owever, there are few reports on the long-term effects of rh--1 and
clinical course of leprechaunism. e previously reported the effect of rh--1 and clinical
course in a patient up to 7β€…yr of age (9).
urthermore, we and others reported retinal neovascularization during treatment with
rh--1 when this patient was 12β€…yr old (12, 13). e have continued to follow this patient. o our
knowledge, the patient is the longest follow-up case so far.Introduction
Leprechaunism is a rare autosomal recessive disease that is characterized by severe insulin
resistance (1,2,3). This disease is caused by a defective
insulin receptor and features abnormal glucose metabolism and retarded intrauterine and
postnatal growth (1,2,3,4).
Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), a 70-amino acid polypeptide with extensive,
structural homology to insulin (48%), exerts its biological effects by binding to IGF-1
receptor (IGF-1R), IR, or IGF-1R/IR hybrid receptor on the surface of target cells (3, 5, 6). It is well known that the insulin and IGF-1 receptors
are structurally related and share common post-receptor signaling pathways (5, 6). Therefore,
exogenous administration of recombinant human IGF-1 (rh-IGF-1) has been used in patients
with leprechaunism (3, 7,8,9,10,11). However, there are few reports on the long-term effects of rh-IGF-1 and
clinical course of leprechaunism. We previously reported the effect of rh-IGF-1 and clinical
course in a patient up to 7β€…yr of age (9).
Furthermore, we and others reported retinal neovascularization during treatment with
rh-IGF-1 when this patient was 12β€…yr old (12, 13). We have continued to follow this patient. To our
knowledge, the patient is the longest follow-up case so far.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Case eport
he patient is a apanese female who is now 24 yr old. er clinical course until 12 yr old
was previously described (9, 12, 13). n brief, she was born
after 39 weeks of gestation as a small for age with a birth weight and length of 1,552β€…g and
44β€…cm, respectively. he had typical multiple phenotypic symptoms of leprechaunism and
showed very high immunoreactive insulin levels. ased on these findings, she was diagnosed
as having leprechaunism. he was treated with rh--1 beginning at 6 mo of age. olecular
analysis of her insulin receptor gene revealed a missense mutation (87) in the paternal
allele and a 1.3-kb deletion between exons 4 and 6 in the maternal allele (14).
linical course of the patient. Thereafter, she was treated with rh-IGF-1, and the dosage was gradually increased to
24β€…mg/d at 11 yr of age to reduce her blood glucose levels. The rh-IGF-1 was given by a
subcutaneous bolus injection before each meal and continuous subcutaneous infusion.
However, it became difficult to control her diabetes despite the high dose of rh-IGF-1.
Her fasting blood glucose levels were 100β€“200β€…mg/dl, and her postprandial blood glucose
levels were 200β€“300β€…mg/dl. Her HbA1c (JDS) levels increased to 10β€“11%. She was prescribed
metformin, voglibose and pioglitazone; however, these medications were ineffective. At the
age of 12β€…yr, she showed neovascular glaucoma and retinal neovascularization in both eyes.
Despite treatment with various medications and cryoretinopexy, she lost her vision as
reported previously (12, 13). Thereafter, her diabetes further deteriorated, and her fasting
blood glucose levels were 200β€“250β€…mg/dl and postprandial blood glucose levels were
250β€“350β€…mg/dl. Her HbA1C levels increased to 12β€“13% (JDS). During this period, her fasting
insulin levels remained high (800β€“1,000 IU/ml). Her growth hormone and IGFBP3 levels
remained undetectable, suggesting GH resistance as reported previously (9). At the age of 11 yr, her breast development started,
and her pubertal stage gradually developed. At the age of 15 yr, she reached her adult
height (143β€…cm, β€“2.7 SD for normal Japanese girl) (Fig.
1Fig. 1 Growth chart of the patient.). Finally, at the age of 18 yr, she developed diabetic ketoacidosis because of
gastroenteritis. At this time, her blood glucose was 835β€…mg/dl, blood vein pH was 6.895,
HCO3- was 3.1 mEq/L and urinary ketone body test was markedly positive. Saline infusion
and continuous intravenous regular insulin (100β€“200 IU/h) were started. Thereafter her
condition improved; however, despite a high dose of insulin infusion, the control of her
fasting and postprandial blood glucose levels was difficult. After this episode, rh-IGF-1
treatment was withdrawn, and high-dose insulin was started (120 IU of insulin aspart and
160 IU of insulin glargine simultaneously before each meal). Despite the massive dose of
insulin, her fasting and postprandial blood glucose levels were 200β€“300β€…mg/dl and
300β€“350β€…mg/dl, respectively. First morning urine ketone body tests were sometimes
positive. At the age of 22 yr, she developed diabetic ketoacidosis again because of
exacerbation of mastitis. She is now treated high-dose insulin (total daily dose of
800IU), but the control of her diabetes remains difficult.Diseases of the breast and uterusAt the age of 3 yr, she underwent tonsillectomy as described previously(9). Regular radiological examination of each organ
showed enlargement of the spleen, kidney, ovary, thyroid gland, submandibular, parotid,
and lacrimal glands since 9β€…yr old. Her ovary became polycystic beginning at 9β€…yr of age
(Fig. 2AFig. 2 (A) MRI findings of the ovary. She developed a polycystic ovary. (B)
Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland identified several nodules. The size of the
nodule in the left lobe was 19 Γ— 16 Γ— 12β€…mm, and it was diagnosed as adenomatous
goiter.). At the age of 14β€…yr, ultrasonography of the thyroid gland identified several
nodules. The size of a nodule in the left lobe was 19 Γ— 16 Γ— 12β€…mm, and it was diagnosed
as adenomatous goiter (Fig. 2B). Beginning at
16β€…yr of age, she frequently complained of painful distention of the bilateral mammary
glands, and purulent effusion form the mammary glands was frequently observed.
Ultrasonography of the mammary glands demonstrated dilation of lactiferous ducts and
several small low echogenic masses. These findings indicated mastitis and fibroadenoma.
After the withdrawal of rh-IGF-1, the size of enlarged organs did not change.In addition, she had an irregular menstrual cycle due to polycystic ovaries, and so she
was monitored regularly in our gynecologic outpatient department. At the age of 24β€…yr,
magnetic resonance image (MRI) demonstrated a thickened endometrium with a low-intensity
nodule of 14 Γ— 12 Γ— 18β€…mm in size in a T2-weighted image (Fig. 3Fig. 3 MRI of the uterus (A) A T2-weighted image showed a low-density nodule of 14 Γ— 12 Γ—
18β€…mm in size. (B) The nodule showed a high-intensity signal in a diffusion weighted
image.). The nodule, which showed a high intensity in diffusion-weighted image, strongly
suggested uterine endometrial neoplasm. Intrauterine endometrial curettage was performed,
and the histological diagnosis was grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Therefore, she
underwent ovariohysterectomy, and the surgical staging was FIGO IA. Stage IA involves the
endometrium and/or less than one-half myometrial invasion. Because her breast diseases
improved after operation presumably due to a lack of estrogen, estrogen replacement
therapy was not applied. She was treated with eldecalcitolΒ© to prevent
osteoporosis due to gonadectomy.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Discussion
n this report, we described the long-term clinical course and rh--1 treatment in a
patient with leprechaunism. o our knowledge, she is the longest surviving patient with
severe insulin receptor mutation.
nitially, rh--1 therapy was effective; however, rh--1 became gradually ineffective.
isruption of the insulin signaling pathway is thought to be a mechanism leading to the
development of insulin resistance; however, this mechanism is complex because of the number
of independent factors in the pathway (15). or
example, persistent hyperglycemia may cause oxidative stress and inhibit insulin signaling
through , resulting in insulin resistance (16). n
addition, continued exposure to insulin leads to a downregulation of receptor numbers (17). urthermore, propagation of the signal from the
insulin receptor to downstream effectors is negatively regulated by hyperinsulinism (18). n this patient, glucose transport is a cascade of
events starting from the interaction of rh--1 with its own receptor and ending with
intracellular glucose metabolism using the identical post-receptor signaling pathways as
insulin. imilar to the mechanism of the development of insulin resistance mentioned above,
hyperglycemia and high -1 levels may be responsible for a deterioration of rh--1
action.
n her clinical course, she developed mastitis and finally endometrial cancer. he -1
system has been implicated in several different malignancies (19, 20). n the uterus, cyclic
changes in -1 expression and signaling play a pivotal role in regulating the transition
of the premenopausal endometrium through proliferative, secretory, and menstrual cycles
(19). lthough the relation between blood level of
-1 and incidence of endometrial cancer is controversial in epidemiological studies (21, 22),
in vitro studies indicated that autocrine stimulation of -1 enhanced
estrogen-induced proliferation of endometrial carcinoma (23, 24). ince the present case had very
high levels of insulin after birth, continuous signaling through -1 by excessive insulin
may be related to the development of endometrial cancer.
egarding her mammary glands, the patient suffered from repeated mastitis and fibroadenoma.
yperplasia of the mammary gland has been reported in leprechaunism (1). t is also known that the -1 and -1 system is important for
mammary gland development (25). aken together, it is
plausible that persistent high levels of insulin may act through -1 in the mammary
gland, and this may have been the reason for the breast disease in the present case.
o our knowledge, the long-term effect of administration of high-dose rh--1 for the
treatment for leprechaunism has not been reported so far. hereas the development of her
complications in the breast and uterus may have been affected by this medication in addition
to hyperinsulinism, there is no direct evidence for this speculation.
n conclusion, we reported the long-term course of a patient with leprechaunism who had
been treated with rh--1 and had persisted hyperinsulinism. he development of breast and
endometrial diseases must be carefully followed up in this disease.Discussion
In this report, we described the long-term clinical course and rh-IGF-1 treatment in a
patient with leprechaunism. To our knowledge, she is the longest surviving patient with
severe insulin receptor mutation.
Initially, rh-IGF-1 therapy was effective; however, rh-IGF-1 became gradually ineffective.
Disruption of the insulin signaling pathway is thought to be a mechanism leading to the
development of insulin resistance; however, this mechanism is complex because of the number
of independent factors in the pathway (15). For
example, persistent hyperglycemia may cause oxidative stress and inhibit insulin signaling
through IR, resulting in insulin resistance (16). In
addition, continued exposure to insulin leads to a downregulation of receptor numbers (17). Furthermore, propagation of the signal from the
insulin receptor to downstream effectors is negatively regulated by hyperinsulinism (18). In this patient, glucose transport is a cascade of
events starting from the interaction of rh-IGF-1 with its own receptor and ending with
intracellular glucose metabolism using the identical post-receptor signaling pathways as
insulin. Similar to the mechanism of the development of insulin resistance mentioned above,
hyperglycemia and high IGF-1 levels may be responsible for a deterioration of rh-IGF-1
action.
In her clinical course, she developed mastitis and finally endometrial cancer. The IGF-1
system has been implicated in several different malignancies (19, 20). In the uterus, cyclic
changes in IGF-1 expression and signaling play a pivotal role in regulating the transition
of the premenopausal endometrium through proliferative, secretory, and menstrual cycles
(19). Although the relation between blood level of
IGF-1 and incidence of endometrial cancer is controversial in epidemiological studies (21, 22),
in vitro studies indicated that autocrine stimulation of IGF-1 enhanced
estrogen-induced proliferation of endometrial carcinoma (23, 24). Since the present case had very
high levels of insulin after birth, continuous signaling through IGF-1R by excessive insulin
may be related to the development of endometrial cancer.
Regarding her mammary glands, the patient suffered from repeated mastitis and fibroadenoma.
Hyperplasia of the mammary gland has been reported in leprechaunism (1). It is also known that the IGF-1 and IGF-1R system is important for
mammary gland development (25). Taken together, it is
plausible that persistent high levels of insulin may act through IGF-1R in the mammary
gland, and this may have been the reason for the breast disease in the present case.
To our knowledge, the long-term effect of administration of high-dose rh-IGF-1 for the
treatment for leprechaunism has not been reported so far. Whereas the development of her
complications in the breast and uterus may have been affected by this medication in addition
to hyperinsulinism, there is no direct evidence for this speculation.
In conclusion, we reported the long-term course of a patient with leprechaunism who had
been treated with rh-IGF-1 and had persisted hyperinsulinism. The development of breast and
endometrial diseases must be carefully followed up in this disease.
</sections.2>

</text>
