<title>
Transcription of the rat sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ adenosine triphosphatase gene is increased by 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine receptor isoform-specific interactions with the myocyte-specific enhancer factor-2a.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Thyroid hormone (T3) increases the transcription of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) gene (SERCA 2) through three thyroid hormone response elements. The existence of repetitive cis elements with different configurations is likely to serve specific functions such as interactions with nuclear transcription factors. In addition, the presence of different T3 receptor isoforms (T3Rs) may contribute to another level of complexity in providing specificity for T3 action. In this study, we investigated T3R alpha 1-vs. T3R beta 1-specific interactions with the myocyte enhancer-specific factor-2 (MEF-2) on the expression of the SERCA 2 gene in transient transfection assays in embryonal heart-derived H9c2 cells. MEF-2a in combination with either T3R alpha 1 or T3R beta 1 isoforms resulted in a 2.5-fold increase in SERCA 2 transgene expression in the absence of T3. Addition of T3 did not induce any further increase in SERCA 2 expression when T3R alpha 1 and MEF-2a expression vectors were cotransfected. In contrast, in the presence of T3R beta 1 and MEF-2, the addition of T3 increased chlorampenicol acetyltransferase activity by an additional 2.2-fold to a total 5.5-fold increase. The interaction between MEF-2a and T3R is transcription factor specific because another factor that binds to MEF-2 consensus sites (heart factor 1b) was not able to interact with T3R. In addition, MEF-2a failed to interact with other nuclear factors (cAMP response element-binding protein and Egr-1) that stimulate SERCA 2 gene transcription. In addition, we found that a single homologous thyroid hormone response element is not able to mediate the interactions between MEF-2a and T3Rs to increase SERCA 2 gene transcription. Our findings point to T3R isoform-specific interactions with a cell type-specific transcription factor (MEF-2) in the regulation of SERCA 2 gene expression.
</abstract>

</text>
