<title>
Mowat-Wilson Syndrome
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is characterized by the following: Distinctive facial features. Structural anomalies including: Hirschsprung disease. Genitourinary anomalies (particularly hypospadias in males). Congenital heart defects (particularly abnormalities of the pulmonary arteries and/or valves). Agenesis or hypogenesis of the corpus callosum. Eye defects (microphthalmia and Axenfeld anomaly). Functional differences including: Moderate to severe intellectual disability. Severe speech impairment with relative preservation of receptive language. Seizures. Growth retardation with microcephaly. Chronic constipation in those without Hirschsprung disease. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Mutations and deletions in ZEB2 (also known as ZFHX1B or SIP-1) cause MWS. Sequence analysis detects mutations in approximately 81% of individuals; FISH detects large deletions encompassing all or part of ZEB2 in approximately 15% of persons; Chromosomal rearrangements that disrupt ZEB2 cause MWS in approximately 2% of individuals; An additional 2% have intermediate-sized deletions that can be detected by techniques such as quantitative PCR, MLPA, or gene-specific array CGH. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care by the appropriate specialist for dental anomalies, seizures, ocular abnormalities, congenital heart defects, chronic constipation, Hirschsprung disease, genitourinary abnormalities, and pectus anomalies of the chest and/or foot/ankle anomalies; educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy. Surveillance: Annual eye examination in childhood to monitor for strabismus and refractive errors; monitoring for otitis media; regular developmental assessments to plan/refine educational interventions; periodic reevaluation by a medical geneticist. GENETIC COUNSELING: Mowat-Wilson syndrome is typically the result of a de novo dominant mutation. When MWS results from a de novo mutation, the risk to the sibs of a proband is small. No individuals with MWS have been known to reproduce. Although the vast majority of MWS occurs as the result of a de novo mutation, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate a pregnancy at theoretically increased risk as a result of constitutional and/or germline mosaicism for a ZEB2 mutation in a clinically unaffected parent. Parents of an individual with MWS resulting from a structural unbalanced chromosome constitution (e.g., deletion, duplication) are at risk of having a balanced chromosome rearrangement. The risk to sibs of a proband with a structural unbalanced chromosome abnormality depends on the chromosome findings in the parents. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk because of a parental balanced structural rearrangement is possible by chromosome analysis of fetal cells obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.
</abstract>

</text>
