<title>
[Protective measures against cerebral ischemia following subarachnoid hemorrhage: Part 1].
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Cerebral vasospasm following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage contributes significantly to morbidity and mortality. Many studies on the various treatments aimed at preventing cerebral vasospasm have been carried out, but evidence of efficacy is limited. Our aim was to review the literature on the various therapies for which there is scientific evidence of protection against cerebral vasospasm following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. METHODS: MEDLINE search (1950 to the october 2009) and review of articles found on the prevention of cerebral vasospasm following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. The search was restricted to articles in English, French, and Spanish. The keywords were cerebral vasospasm, subarachnoid hemorrhage, therapy, nimodipine, triple H, clazosentan, statins, and magnesium in addition to the word forms derived from them. We also searched manually for references cited in the selected articles. A title was included if it was a randomized controlled trial, meta-analysis, nonrandomized clinical trial, descriptive study, observational study with statistical analysis, opinion article, or expert review. RESULTS: Part 1 analyzed treatment with calcium antagonists and triple-H therapy (hypertension, hemodilution, and hypervolemia). Part 2 analyzed new therapies such as clazosentan, magnesium, and statins. A total of 597 titles were located; 283 were initially selected. The 61 articles finally selected for review were of the following types: 2 opinion articles, 21 randomized controlled trials, 22 expert review articles, 3 meta-analyses, 4 nonrandomized clinical trials, 1 descriptive study, and 5 observational studies with statistical analysis. Three studies (2 meta-analyses and 1 randomized controlled trial) demonstrated that nimodipine use confers benefits (reduced morbidity and mortality) for patients with aneurysmatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. Statistically significant clinical benefits could not be demonstrated for the other drugs (clazosentan, statins, and magnesium). CONCLUSIONS: Insufficient evidence is available to support the use of the triple-H therapy, clazosentan, statins, or magnesium sulfate for the prevention of cerebral vasospasm following subarachnoid hemorrhage. Nimodipine is the only preventative treatment that can be recommended.
</abstract>

</text>
