<title>
Signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) is constitutively activated in normal, self-renewing B-1 cells but only inducibly expressed in conventional B lymphocytes.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Cytokine and growth factor receptor engagement leads to the rapid phosphorylation and activation of latent, cytosolic signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins, which then translocate to the nucleus where they regulate transcriptional events from specific promoter sequences. STAT3 expression in particular has been associated with Abl, Src, and HTLV-1 transformation of normal cells. B-1 lymphocytes are self-renewing, CD5+ B cells that display a propensity for malignant transformation and are the normal counterpart to human chronic lymphocytic leukemias. Further, B-1 cells are characterized by aberrant intracellular signaling, including hyperresponsiveness to phorbol ester PKC agonists. Here we demonstrate that B-1 lymphocytes constitutively express nuclear activated STAT3, which is not expressed by unmanipulated conventional (B-2) lymphocytes. In contrast, STAT3 activation is induced in B-2 cells after antigen receptor engagement in a delayed fashion (after 3 h). Induction of STAT3 is inhibited by both the serine/threonine protein kinase inhibitor H-7 and the immunosuppressive drug rapamycin and requires de novo protein synthesis, demonstrating novel coupling between sIg and STAT proteins that differs from the classical paradigm for STAT induction by cytokine receptors. The inability of prolonged stimulation of conventional B-2 cells with anti-Ig, a treatment sufficient to induce CD5 expression, to result in sustained STAT3 activation suggests that STAT3 is a specific nuclear marker for B-1 cells. Thus, STAT3 may play a role in B cell antigen-specific signaling responses, and its constitutive activation is associated with a normal cell population exhibiting intrinsic proliferative behavior.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
The 67-k. D panβ€“T cell surface glycoprotein, CD5, was  first detected on the surface of human and murine B cell  tumors and subsequently found to specify a subset of normal B lymphocytes in both species (1). CD5+ (or B-1) B  lymphocytes are mature B cells that predominate early in  life, decline in relative number as the animal matures, and,  in mice, become confined to the peritoneal cavity, with  few, if any, present in the peripheral lymph nodes (2).  Functionally, B-1 cells contribute a disproportionally large  fraction of serum Ig, specifically of the ΞΌ, Ξ±, and Ξ³ classes.  These Igs are noted to express germline encoded specificities, with little somatic mutation and N-insertion and may  be involved in the regulation of idiotype expression (3, 4).
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
B-1 cells have been linked to both autoantibody production and the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease as well as  malignancy (2, 5). 5+  cells have been found to be enriched sources of autoantibody-producing cells specific for  various self-antigens, and several mouse strains that develop  autoimmune pathology have elevated numbers of splenic  and peritoneal 5  cells (6, 7). doptive transfer experiments have demonstrated that -1 cells have self-renewing  capacity (8), and in vitro, these cells are readily immortalized in culture without the use of exogenously induced  transformation (9). oupled with their hyperresponsiveness  to  stimulation and their inability to enter  phase after s. Ig cross-linking (10, 11), these observations suggest that  B-1 cells differ from B-2 cells in their biochemical makeup  in ways that may contribute to autoantibody secretion and  unregulated growth.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Signal transducers and activators of transcription ()1  proteins were first characterized by studying signaling in response to interferon and have since been implicated in cellular responses to a plethora of cytokines and growth factors  (12, 13).  signaling involves the activation of the  /tyk family of tyrosine kinases that are believed to be  associated with unliganded cytokine receptors and to phosphorylate latent cytoplasmic  proteins upon ligand  binding (14). hosphorylated s dimerize via interactions between their 2 domains (15), allowing nuclear  translocation and  binding activity specific for distinct  sequence elements in cytokine and growth factorβ€“stimulated genes. e have previously shown that mitogenic  stimulation through surface g in -2 cells induces the activation of  proteins (16). his observation, coupled  with the association of 3 with abnormal cell growth  and transformation (17β€“20), led us to compare the status  and activational responses of 3 proteins in -1 and  -2 cells. ur results indicate that the nuclear expression of  activated  proteins differs between -1 and -2 cells  and that the  protein profile may be a distinguishing  molecular feature of the -1 cell phenotype.Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)1  proteins were first characterized by studying signaling in response to interferon and have since been implicated in cellular responses to a plethora of cytokines and growth factors  (12, 13). STAT signaling involves the activation of the  JAK/tyk family of tyrosine kinases that are believed to be  associated with unliganded cytokine receptors and to phosphorylate latent cytoplasmic STAT proteins upon ligand  binding (14). Phosphorylated STATs dimerize via interactions between their SH2 domains (15), allowing nuclear  translocation and DNA binding activity specific for distinct  sequence elements in cytokine and growth factorβ€“stimulated genes. We have previously shown that mitogenic  stimulation through surface Ig in B-2 cells induces the activation of STAT proteins (16). This observation, coupled  with the association of STAT3 with abnormal cell growth  and transformation (17β€“20), led us to compare the status  and activational responses of STAT3 proteins in B-1 and  B-2 cells. Our results indicate that the nuclear expression of  activated STAT proteins differs between B-1 and B-2 cells  and that the STAT protein profile may be a distinguishing  molecular feature of the B-1 cell phenotype.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Materials and ethods
nimals.ale /c. ByJ mice at 8β€“14 wk of age were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice were  housed at least 1 wk before experimentation. Mice were cared for  and handled at all times in accordance with National Institutes of  Health and institutional guidelines.B Cell Purification.B-1 lymphocytes were prepared by negative selection from peritoneal wash-out cells as previously described  (21). B-2 cells were purified from spleen cells of 8β€“12-wk-old naive mice by depletion of T cells using treatment with antiβ€“Thy  1.2 antibody plus rabbit complement and depletion of macrophages by overnight culture on plastic petri dishes, as previously described (22). RBC and nonviable cells were removed by sedimentation over Lympholyte M (Cedarlane, Ontario, Canada). The  resulting B cells were cultured at 37Β°C with 5% CO2 in RPMI  1640 medium (BioWhittaker, Walkersville, MD) supplemented  with 5% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (Sigma Chem. Co., St.  Louis, MO), 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.2), 50 ΞΌM 2-ME, 2 mM  l-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 ΞΌg/ml streptomycin.  In some experiments, B-1 cells were prepared in the presence of  serum-free RPMI 1640 medium containing 1% bovine serum albumin and cultured in serum-free AIM-V medium (GIBCO BRL,  Gaithersburg, MD).Nuclear Extracts and Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay. Nuclear  extracts from untreated or stimulated primary B cells were prepared  using 430 mM NaCl at pH 7.9 as previously described (22), except that 1 mM sodium orthovanadate was added to all extraction  buffers. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford  method (23) (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Nuclear extracted protein  was incubated with 32P-labeled double-stranded oligonucleotide  containing the high-affinity SIE (m67) derived from the c-fos gene  (24) (5β€²GTGCATTTCCCGTAAATCTTGTCTACAATTC3β€²)  for 20 min before electrophoresis on nondenaturing 5% polyacrylamide gels. Binding reactions contained 1 ΞΌg poly(dI-dC) and  2.0 ΞΌg salmon sperm DNA. For competition analysis, 20-fold excess unlabeled SIE or NF-AT oligonucleotide (25) was added to  binding reactions before addition of nuclear protein and electrophoresis. Supershift/immunoinhibition analysis was performed by  addition of 1 ΞΌl anti-p91N or antiphosphotyrosine701STAT1 for  an additional 30 min at 4Β°C after the 20-min electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) binding reaction.Western Blotting.Nuclear extracted protein (5 ΞΌg) was resolved by 7.5% SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose and blocked  with 5% nonfat powdered milk in wash buffer (20 mM Tris, pH  7.6, 0.14 M NaCl, and 0.1% Tween-20; TBS-T) overnight at  4Β°C. The nitrocellulose filters were then probed with antiphosphotyrosine701STAT1 (26), or with antiphosphotyrosine705 STAT3  antiserum, generated by immunization of rabbits with a synthetic  peptide containing amino acids 696-709 of human STAT3, with  phosphotyrosine at position 705, which was conjugated to bovine  serum albumin. Blots were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with antibody in 3% BSAβ€“TBS-T. After washing, blots were  developed by ECL.Shift-Western.EMSA was performed as described above except 5 ΞΌg of nuclear extracts were added to 1.5Γ— the normal  amount of labeled oligonucleotide and electrophoresed on 5%  polyacrylamide gels. SIE-binding proteins were separated from  retarded labeled oligonucleotide by electrophoretic transfer from  the native gel to nitrocellulose paper. Labeled oligonucleotide  was detected bound to DE-81 paper (Whatman, Hillsboro, OR)  placed under the nitrocellulose filter and on top of Whatman filter paper. After transfer, the nitrocellulose filters were blocked  and Western blotted as above and the DE-81/Whatman filters  were dried for 10 min before autoradiography.Reagents.F(abβ€²)2 fragments of goat antiβ€“mouse IgM (Jackson  Immunoresearch, Inc., West Grove, PA) were used at a concentration of 15 ΞΌg/ml. PMA (Sigma) was used at 100 ng/ml. Cells  were stimulated with murine recombinant IFN-Ξ³ (5 ng/ml) or  IL-6 (1,000 U/ml), both from Genzyme (Cambridge, MA). Rabbit antiserum to the NH2-terminal domain of p91 (anti-p91N) was  the kind gift of Dr. C. Schindler (Columbia University, New  York). Rabbit antiserum specific for only the tyrosine-phosphorylated form of STAT1 was generated by immunization of rabbits  with a peptide designed from the STAT1Ξ± protein containing  phosphorylated Tyr 701 (26). Rapamycin was used at 20 ng/ml,  dissolved in ethanol and 1-(5-isoquinolinesulfonyl)-2-methylpiperazine (H-7) and N-(2β€²-guanidinoethyl)-5-isoquinolinesulfonamide  (HA-1004) (LC Laboratories, Woburn, MA) were used at 25 ΞΌM.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Results and iscussion
o determine whether the unusual growth characteristics  of -1 cells are accompanied by differences in the regulation of  proteins, we compared  -binding  activities between resting -1 and -2 cells. uclear extracts from untreated -1 cells formed proteinβ€“ complexes with the high-affinity sis-inducible element () of  the c-fos gene (27), a recognized -binding site (1), as  detected by  (ig. 1 ). he major -1 cellβ€“specific  -binding activity was observed to co-migrate with the  -6β€“stimulated sis-inducible factor ()  binding complex, with a smaller amount co-migrating similarly to the  -³β€“induced   complex (24, 28β€“30). n contrast,  no  , and little   activity was detected in nuclear  extracts obtained from unmanipulated -2 cells. 
he -1 cell complexes were competed by unlabeled  -containing oligonucleotide but not by the consensus  binding site for the nuclear factor of activated  cells (-)  (ig. 1 ), indicating that these complexes are specific for  the . he constitutive expression of  complexes in  -1 cells was not the result of serum induction in vitro, as  these complexes were still formed from nuclear extracts prepared from -1 cells purified and cultured in serum-free  medium and were not inducible upon subsequent serum  treatment (ig. 1 ). ntibody to the 2-terminal region  of 1± (anti-p91), which has been shown to recognize 3 induced by ciliary neurotrophic factor ()  (31), disrupted   induced by -6 in  cells (ig. 2 ).  he constitutively expressed -1  β€“like complex was  also disrupted by anti-p91 but not by an antibody to phosphotyrosine7011 (ig. 2 ). nti-p91 formed supershifted complexes with   in both -6β€“stimulated  cells  and untreated -1 cells which were apparent in longer exposures and showed identical electrophoretic mobilities; antisera to  4, 5, or 6 failed to react with the -1 cell    complex in  supershift assays or with -1 cell nuclear extracts in estern blotting experiments, and antibody  that supershifted 1 activated by -³ immunoinhibited/supershifted only a small amount of the    complex of -1 cells (data not shown). ecause 3 is  only known to form homodimers or to heterodimerize with  1, these results strongly suggest that -1 cells differ  from -2 cells in the basal nuclear expression of 3  homodimers that comprise the   nucleoprotein complex. 
o assess the contribution of phosphorylated 3 to  the   complex constitutively present in -1 cells, we  performed hiftβ€“estern experiments, using nuclear extracted protein, the -containing oligonucleotide, and antiphosphotyrosine7053. he mobility shift assay is shown  in ig. 2 , top. uclear extracts from either unstimulated  -1 or -2 cells or from -2 cells treated with -6 for 15  min were incubated with the  oligonucleotide before  . he   complexes constitutively present in untreated -1 cells and -6β€“treated -2 cells were found to  contain phosphotyrosine7053, as determined by immunoblotting material obtained from the native gel (ig. 2  , bottom). s a control, phosphotyrosine7053 electrophoresed in the absence of the -containing oligonucleotide (no  control) was observed to migrate more  slowly in the gel, distinguishing it from -bound 3  (data not shown). hese results confirm that 3 is  constitutively present in -1 nuclei, as indicated by the supershifting experiments outlined above and show that it is  present as a tyrosine phosphorylated protein in the    complex.
e further examined the phosphorylation status of  3 in nuclear extracts from -1 and -2 cells.   has been reported to induce the tyrosine phosphorylation  of two 3 isoforms, p88 and p89 (31). hese isoforms,  whose phosphorylation is also inducible by -6 (29, 32,  33), have been termed 3f (p88), for faster migrating  and 3s (p89), for slower migrating (32, 34). mmunoblotting with antiserum specific for 3 phosphorylated  on tyrosine705 showed that -2 cells express little nuclear  phosphotyrosine7053s or 3f, as expected on the  basis of  analysis (ig. 1 ). n comparison, -1 cell  nuclear extracts were found to contain roughly equal levels  of phosphotyrosine7053s and 3f, respectively,  which co-migrated with -6β€“induced phosphotyrosine705  3 from -2 cells (ig. 2 ). n addition, immunoblotting untreated -1 cell nuclear extracts with antibody  specific for 1 phosphorylated on tyrosine701 (26) detected activated 1 of the p91 isoform, which was not  present in nuclear extracts from untreated -2 cells but was  inducible by -³ treatment (ig. 2 ). hus, the -1β€“specific expression of   correlates with the presence of the  phosphotyrosine705 forms of 3s and 3f in nuclei  from unstimulated -1 cells, and -1 cells also constitutively express a small amount of activated p91-1.
he presence of   and phosphotyrosine7053 in  -1 cells could not be due to macrophage contamination,  because purified macrophages isolated by adherence during   cell purification from the same animals did not contain  nuclear   or phosphotyrosine7053, and histologic  examination of -1 populations revealed less than 2% macrophage contamination (data not shown). urther, overnight incubation of -1 cells with neutralizing antibody to  -10 before preparation of nuclear extracts did not result  in diminution of the   complex observed by   (data not shown), suggesting that an -10 autocrine loop  does not account for the observed elevated levels of 3  in unstimulated -1 cells and that constitutive 3 expression is intrinsic to this population.
revious work has shown that anti-g treatment of -2  cells results in 1 activation (35). t has been suggested  that -1 cells represent a population of conventional  cells  previously activated through their antigen receptors. or  these reasons, 3 activation was evaluated in nuclear  extracts from -2 cells treated with anti-g. uclear extracts from anti-gβ€“treated -2 cells formed a   complex with the  similar to that observed in untreated -1  cells, although this activity was only present in extracts from  cells stimulated for 3 h or more (ig. 3 ). s with -1  ,  anti-p91 but not antiserum to phosphotyrosine7011  disrupted   induced by anti-g in -2 cells (ig. 3 )  and formed a supershifted complex with   that was  visible in longer exposures and co-migrated with a similar  complex recognized by anti-p91 in -6β€“treated  cells  (data not shown). urther, phosphotyrosine7053s was  detected by immunoblotting using nuclear extracts from  -2 cells treated for 3 h with anti-g, although little phosphotyrosine7053f was observed (ig. 4 ).  cells stimulated with anti-g for less than 3 h did not contain nuclear  phosphotyrosine7053s or 3f (data not shown).  hese results suggest that cross-linking s. Ig in B-2 cells generates activated nuclear STAT3 of predominantly the STAT3s  isoform, much like IL-6 treatment of B-2 cells but dissimilar from the phosphotyrosine705STAT3 profile of unstimulated B-1 cells, in which levels of STAT3s and STAT3f are  nearly equal (Fig. 2 C). Thus, constitutively expressed B-1  cell STAT3 is not the same as STAT3 induced in B-2 cells  by sIg or cytokine receptor engagement.  
The formation and transcriptional activity of cytokineinduced STAT3 complexes have been shown to require  inducible serine phosphorylation (32, 36). Because many  sIg triggered downstream events are PKC dependent, we  tested whether anti-Ig induction of STAT3 in B-2 cells is  sensitive to inhibition of serine/threonine phosphorylation,  using the inhibitor, H7. The induction of phosphotyrosine705STAT3s by anti-Ig was completely inhibited by H7  but not by treatment with (the control analog) HA1004  (Fig. 4 A). Preincubation with H7 but not with HA1004  also completely blocked the formation of the SIF Aβ€“binding complex in EMSA experiments conducted using nuclear extracts from B-2 cells stimulated with anti-Ig for 3 h  (Fig. 4 B). These results suggest that nuclear localization of  phosphotyrosine705STAT3s and the appearance of nuclear  SIF A in B-2 cells stimulated by anti-Ig requires serine/ threonine phosphorylation and further implicate STAT3s  in the composition of the anti-Igβ€“induced SIF A complex.
The delayed tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 after  sIg ligation in B-2 cells suggested that the synthesis of an  intermediary protein is required for this response. To test  this possibility, B-2 cells were stimulated with anti-Ig in the  presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide  (CHX) and nuclear extracts were prepared. CHX completely blocked the induction of phosphotyrosine705STAT3s in  nuclear extracts from B-2 cells treated with anti-Ig for 3 h,  whereas CHX had no effect on phosphotyrosine705STAT3  stimulated by IL-6 (Fig. 4 C). CHX also abrogated the formation of the SIF Aβ€“binding complex in EMSA experiments performed using nuclear extracts from B-2 cells  stimulated with anti-Ig for 3 h (data not shown). Thus, de  novo protein synthesis is required for induction of both SIF  A and of phosphotyrosine705STAT3s by anti-Ig.
Since anti-Ig is a mitogenic stimulus for B-2 cells, we  reasoned that induction of STAT3 via this novel mechanism may be sensitive to immunosuppressive drugs that inhibit B cell proliferation, such as cyclosporin A, FK506,  and rapamycin (37, 38). Immunoblot analysis of nuclear  extracted protein showed substantial inhibition of anti- Igβ€“induced phosphotyrosine705STAT3s by rapamycin (Fig.  4 D). Rapamycin also significantly blocked the formation  of the anti-Igβ€“inducible SIF A complex (Fig. 4 E). This effect of rapamycin is specific for sIg-triggered STAT3 because induction of phosphotyrosine705STAT3 by IL-6 was  not affected by rapamycin (data not shown). Further, B-2  cell treatment with CsA had a minimal effect on nuclear  expression of phosphotyrosine705STAT3s after anti-Ig stimulation but completely inhibited nuclear phosphotyrosine705STAT3s induced by the combination of PMA and  the calcium ionophore, ionomycin (data not shown) demonstrating an additional level of specificity for the effect of  rapamycin on anti-Igβ€“induced STAT3.
Both the delayed appearance and dependence on protein  synthesis of phosphotyrosine705STAT3 in B-2 cells after  anti-Ig stimulation raised the possibility that sIg-mediated  STAT3 induction may be due to the release of cytokines  from the B cells themselves or from other contaminating  cells in the B-2 cell preparation after treatment with antiIg. To address this question, nuclear extracts from the mature B cell line BAL-17 were prepared and immunoblotted  for phosphotyrosine705STAT3 after stimulation with anti-Ig.  Phosphotyrosine705STAT3s was induced in BAL-17 B cells  by anti-Ig treatment with similar kinetics to that observed  in B-2 cells (data not shown) ruling out a role for a factor  secreted by a contaminating nonβ€“B cell. In addition, culture supernatants from B cells stimulated by anti-Ig for 3 h  were transfered to naive cells, from which nuclear extracts  were prepared after 15 min and tested for the presence of  phosphotyrosine705STAT3 by immunoblotting. Supernatants from cultures treated with anti-Ig for 3 h did not induce  appreciable rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 in previously naive cells (data not shown), as would be expected  of a cytokine-mediated response. These results, coupled  with the sensitivity of this response to rapamycin, which  does not inhibit cytokine-mediated STAT signaling, suggest that the delayed tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 is  specific to anti-Ig treatment and is not the result of cytokine release or synthesis triggered by cell activation.
Prolonged exposure of B-2 cells to anti-Ig (e.g., for 2.5 d)  has been shown to result in the acquisition of surface CD5  expression and proliferative responsiveness to PMA (39,  40). The possibility that prolonged sIg crosslinking produces a B-1β€“like basal level of nuclear activated STAT3  was tested by treating B-2 cells with anti-Ig for several days  before nuclear extraction. Although B-2 cells treated with  anti-Ig for 2.5 d responded to PMA by cell cycle progression to S phase, sIg-mediated nuclear SIF A (which was apparent at 3 h) had disappeared by this time (Fig. 5). This result indicates that STAT3 induced by anti-Ig in B-2 cells is  only transiently expressed, and thus long term T cellβ€“independent type II (TI-2) antigenic stimulation of B-2 cells does  not recapitulate the profile of activated STAT3 characteristic of B-1 cells, despite inducing other B-1β€“like changes.  These results suggest that activated STAT3 expression is an  intrinsic and unique characteristic of B-1 cells. 
In conclusion, we have identified constitutive nuclear  activated STAT3 in normal murine B-1 lymphocytes, representing the first nuclear transcriptional identifier for this  developmentally regulated B cell population. The B-1 cell  subset has been linked to spontaneously arising B cell tumors,  and STAT3 has been found to be activated in v-abl-transformed B cells, HTLV-Iβ€“transformed T cells, and v-srcβ€“  transformed fibroblasts (17β€“20). Basal levels of nuclear phosphorylated STAT3 may reflect, or may cause, the activated  state of B-1 cells, and may contribute to the self-renewing  growth characteristics and the oncogenic potential of normal B-1 cells in vivo. In contrast, both egr-1 and c-myc  mRNA levels do not differ between B-1 and B-2 cells (41). 
There has been considerable debate over whether B-1  cells are derived from a separate lineage of progenitor cells  or represent B-2 cells that have undergone internal biochemical and external cell surface marker changes due to  prior activational or differentiative responses, such as those  delivered by TI-2 antigens (42, 43). Our data suggest that  one activity of sIg cross-linking in conventional B cells is to  activate STAT3, which occurs in delayed fashion, involves  phosphorylation of tyrosine705, and is dependent upon de  novo protein synthesis, serine/threonine phosphorylation,  and the participation of a rapamycin-inhibitable kinase.  Thus, the B cell antigen receptor is coupled to nuclear expression of activated STAT proteins (this work and references 16, 35). Notably, many features of this coupling  stand in stark contrast to the accepted paradigm for STAT  activation mediated by cytokine receptors, in which STAT  phosphorylation occurs rapidly, does not require protein  synthesis, and is independent of rapamycin-sensitive kinase  activity. However, the basal presence of both activated  STAT3s and STAT3f in unstimulated B-1 cells contrasts with  the transient induction of predominantly the STAT3s isoform in anti-Ig stimulated B-2 cells and suggests that crosslinking sIg alone does not result in similar nuclear expression, in B-2 cells, of this activated transcription factor  present in B-1 cells. Therefore, constitutive B-1 cell STAT3  expression suggests that the development of these B cells  cannot be explained by TI-2 antigenβ€“mediated influences  alone, and that STAT proteins play a role in directing the  unique behavioral and phenotypic characteristics of this  population of normal cells.
</sections.4>

</text>
