<title>
Accelerated growth in the absence of DNA replication origins.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
DNA replication initiates at defined sites called origins, which serve as binding sites for initiator proteins that recruit the replicative machinery. Origins differ in number and structure across the three domains of life and their properties determine the dynamics of chromosome replication. Bacteria and some archaea replicate from single origins, whereas most archaea and all eukaryotes replicate using multiple origins. Initiation mechanisms that rely on homologous recombination operate in some viruses. Here we show that such mechanisms also operate in archaea. We use deep sequencing to study replication in Haloferax volcanii and identify four chromosomal origins of differing activity. Deletion of individual origins results in perturbed replication dynamics and reduced growth. However, a strain lacking all origins has no apparent defects and grows significantly faster than wild type. Origin-less cells initiate replication at dispersed sites rather than at discrete origins and have an absolute requirement for the recombinase RadA, unlike strains lacking individual origins. Our results demonstrate that homologous recombination alone can efficiently initiate the replication of an entire cellular genome. This raises the question of what purpose replication origins serve and why they have evolved.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Haloferax volcanii is a genetically-tractable archaeon2,3, its 2.85 b main chromosome is replicated from multiple origins4 using machinery homologous to that found in eukaryotes1. o characterize replication dynamics in . volcanii, we generated replication profiles by deep sequencing the wild isolate 2 and laboratory strain 26 (upplementary able 1). ead counts from asynchronous replicating cells were normalized to non-replicating cells (xtended ata ig. 1)5. eaks in relative copy number correspond to sequences that are over-represented in replicating cells and therefore identify active origins (ig. 1). n the wild isolate 2, peaks at 0 and 1593 kb of the main chromosome co-localize with previously described origins (ori. C1 and oriC2, respectively), as do peaks in the mega-plasmid profiles (Extended Data Fig. 2)4. The peak at 571 kb represents a third chromosomal origin, oriC3 (Extended Data Fig. 3). Unlike oriC1 and oriC2, oriC3 is not situated at a nucleotide skew inflection point4; in bacteria and archaea, such inflection points reflect origin usage over evolutionary timescales6. This is consistent with infrequent use of oriC3 or the recent acquisition of an origin at this location.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
The sharp peaks reflect discrete origins, whereas the smooth valleys represent broad zones of termination7. road termination zones (as opposed to specific termination sites) have been described in other archaea8 and in eukaryotes7,9, suggesting they are a feature of chromosomes with multiple origins. he variable peak heights indicate that the chromosomal origins differ in activity, this interpretation is supported by mathematical modeling (. de oura, personal communication) and plasmid-based assays (xtended ata ig. 3c). uch a functional hierarchy of origins may be due to different usage and/or activation times9,10.The sharp peaks reflect discrete origins, whereas the smooth valleys represent broad zones of termination7. Broad termination zones (as opposed to specific termination sites) have been described in other archaea8 and in eukaryotes7,9, suggesting they are a feature of chromosomes with multiple origins. The variable peak heights indicate that the chromosomal origins differ in activity, this interpretation is supported by mathematical modeling (A. de Moura, personal communication) and plasmid-based assays (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Such a functional hierarchy of origins may be due to different usage and/or activation times9,10.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Laboratory strain 26 shows discontinuities in the replication profiles of the main chromosome and mega-plasmid p. HV4 (at 249 and 286 kb respectively; Fig. 1b). Discontinuities indicate substantial differences in replication time between adjacent regions and suggest genome rearrangements11. We determined this rearrangement to be integration of pHV4 into the main chromosome (Fig. 1c, 1d and Extended Data Fig. 4). Remapping the data to a reconstructed genome sequence results in a continuous profile (Fig. 1c and 3a). The additional peak at 535 kb corresponds to the integrated pHV4 origin, ori-pHV4.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
If an origin is active in all cells and used only once per generation, the ratio of origin to terminus regions cannot exceed 2:1; values of >2:1 are only possible if concurrent rounds of replication are initiated. he ratio of the wild isolate is 2:1 (ig. 1a), but exceeds 2:1 for 26 (ig. 1c and 3a). his is consistent with concurrent rounds of replication and precludes the existence of alternating phases of replication and segregation in . volcanii (in contrast to eukaryotes and crenarchaea such as ulfolobus12). herefore, regulated timing of origin activation is unlikely and the peak height differences we observe are probably due to differences in origin usage.If an origin is active in all cells and used only once per generation, the ratio of origin to terminus regions cannot exceed 2:1; values of >2:1 are only possible if concurrent rounds of replication are initiated. The ratio of the wild isolate is 2:1 (Fig. 1a), but exceeds 2:1 for H26 (Fig. 1c and 3a). This is consistent with concurrent rounds of replication and precludes the existence of alternating phases of replication and segregation in H. volcanii (in contrast to eukaryotes and crenarchaea such as Sulfolobus12). Therefore, regulated timing of origin activation is unlikely and the peak height differences we observe are probably due to differences in origin usage.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
We tested the requirement for origins by chromosomal deletion in strain 26 (hereafter designated wild-type). ll combinations of origin deletion resulted in viable strains, including a strain deleted for all four chromosomal origins (ig. 2a). eletion of individual origins led to minor changes in  content (notably ”ori. C3), but the strain lacking all chromosomal origins had a DNA content profile indistinguishable from wild-type (Fig. 2b). We used pairwise growth competition to quantify strain fitness (Fig. 2c). Single origin deletion strains grew slower than wild-type, with strains lacking oriC3 exhibiting the greatest growth defect. Surprisingly, the strain deleted for all four origins grew 7.5% faster than wild-type, and the strain lacking the three most active origins (oriC1,2,3) grew 5.5% faster (Fig. 2c). In fact, growth rate correlates inversely with the activity of remaining origins. For example, the Ξ”oriC2,3 strain retains the most active origin oriC1 and has a 0.8% growth defect, whereas the Ξ”oriC1,2 strain has lost the two most active origins and has a 2.3% growth advantage.
</sections.4>

<sections.5>
How could genome replication be maintained despite the deletion of all chromosomal origins? eletion of known origins might reveal dormant origins as seen in yeast13,14. lternatively, replication could initiate independently of canonical origins, with little or no site specificity. o distinguish between these possibilities, we profiled replication in the origin deletion strains (ig. 3, upplementary able 1). he peaks associated with deleted origin(s) are no longer evident and there are no new discrete peaks. he minima have relocated indicating that there are no enforced termination sites. he profiles of strains deleted for all (or the three most active) origins show a zone of copy number enrichment near the ”ori. C2 locus (Fig. 3e and f; ~2230 kb). However, this does not resemble the sharp peaks associated with characterized origins (Fig. 1 and 3a). Therefore, we find no evidence for activation of dormant origins.
</sections.5>

<sections.6>
Instead, the profiles are consistent with origin-independent initiation. n contrast to the sharp peaks observed in the wild-type, profiles of the single origin deletion strains exhibit global flattening that has rounded the remaining peaks (ig. 3b-d); the minima at termination zones are also shallower. harp peaks indicate discrete origin sites, therefore peak flattening is a consequence of replication initiation at dispersed sites. he profiles of strains deleted for all (or the most active) origins are largely flat, consistent with widespread origin-independent initiation (ig. 3e and f).Instead, the profiles are consistent with origin-independent initiation. In contrast to the sharp peaks observed in the wild-type, profiles of the single origin deletion strains exhibit global flattening that has rounded the remaining peaks (Fig. 3b-d); the minima at termination zones are also shallower. Sharp peaks indicate discrete origin sites, therefore peak flattening is a consequence of replication initiation at dispersed sites. The profiles of strains deleted for all (or the most active) origins are largely flat, consistent with widespread origin-independent initiation (Fig. 3e and f).
</sections.6>

<sections.7>
We considered two mechanisms for dispersed initiation. rigins are binding sites for the initiator protein 1; in the absence of origins, 1 could bind non-specifically throughout the genome15. lternatively, dispersed initiation could rely upon homologous recombination. rigin-independent replication can occur when recombination (-loop) or transcription (-loop) intermediates are used to prime replication16,17. e note that in strains deleted for all or the most active origins, the zone of copy number enrichment at ~2230 kb is near the rrn. B rRNA operon (Fig. 3e and f; 2234-2239 kb). Highly transcribed DNA is associated with elevated recombination levels18, therefore D-loops and R-loops in the rrnB region could facilitate replication initiation. This is analogous to recombination-dependent replication in viruses17 and to DNA damage-inducible replication in Escherichia coli. The latter is known as β€�stable DNA replicationβ€™ and occurs in the absence of oriC or the initiator protein DnaA; instead it relies on recombination catalyzed by RecA to initiate replication16.
</sections.7>

<sections.8>
H. volcanii mutants lacking ad. A (the archaeal RecA/Rad51 homologue) are viable but defective in recombination. Unlike RecA, RadA does not have a secondary role in activating an SOS response19. However, RadA is essential for the replication of pHV2-based plasmids, which do not use ORC-based initiation20. We attempted to delete radA from the origin deletion strains using established methods21. This was successful in the wild-type and single origin deletion strains, but only a single Ξ”oriC1,2,3 Ξ”radA isolate was recovered; this strain had undergone a chromosomal rearrangement involving ori-pHV4 (Extended Data Fig. 5). We were unable to delete radA from the strain lacking all four origins, indicating that recombination is essential in the absence of replication origins. To confirm this, we placed radA under control of a tryptophan-inducible promoter (Extended Data Fig. 6)22. In the absence of tryptophan, when this promoter is tightly repressed, wild-type cells with inducible radA are viable whereas origin-less cells fail to grow (Fig. 4).
</sections.8>

<sections.9>
Work by ogoma16 showed that . coli ori. C mutants can use homologous recombination to initiate replication. However these cells exhibit profound growth defects23. In contrast, origin-less strains of H. volcanii grow faster than wild-type. Furthermore, recombination-dependent replication in E. coli is only possible in strains harboring suppressor mutations (e.g. sdrA, which stabilizes R-loops by inactivating RNaseHI16). We found no mutations in any of the four H. volcanii RNaseH genes. Only five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified in the strain lacking all origins, and all of these SNPs are already present in the respective parent strains (Extended Data Table 1). Therefore, we find no evidence for suppressors, akin to those reported by Kogoma23, which are required for growth in the absence of origins.
</sections.9>

<sections.10>
Our results indicate that it is possible to replicate an entire genome by recombination-dependent initiation alone, with no apparent cost to fitness. ow might this be accomplished? n wild-type, binding of 1 at origins leads to recruitment of the replicative helicase , which may be rate-limiting for initiation1. n the single origin deletion strains, liberation of  from deleted origins could stimulate recombination-dependent initiation, resulting in flattening of the replication profiles (ig. 3b-d). e postulate that the activity of origins correlates with their affinity for . herefore, deleting an active origin (ori. C1) liberates more MCM than deleting a weak origin (oriC3). This liberated MCM is recruited to D-loops and used to initiate recombination-dependent replication. Our observation that growth rate correlates inversely with the activity of remaining origins (Fig. 2c) suggests that recombination-dependent replication is more efficient than origin-dependent replication, but the former has a lower affinity for MCM. Consistent with this, Pyrococcus abyssi MCM is recruited to both the origin and a region containing rRNA and tRNA genes; the latter becomes the major binding site in stationary phase, suggesting liberation of MCM from the origin24.
</sections.10>

<sections.11>
What then is the purpose of replication origins? t is assumed that regularly-spaced origins ensure genome duplication in the shortest possible time25. his assumption is challenged by our data showing that origin-less cells grow faster than wild-type. lternatively, defined origins can be used to co-ordinate the direction of replication with the orientation of highly-expressed genes. ollisions between replication and transcription machineries can stall  replication, and restarting stalled forks by recombination entails a risk of genome rearrangements. e did not observe any such rearrangements, except when the ”ori. C1,2,3 strain was challenged with inactivation of recombination (Extended Data Fig. 5). Moreover, the rapid growth of origin-less mutants suggests that collisions between replication and transcription are less problematic than assumed.
</sections.11>

<sections.12>
Regulated initiation at origins allows for coordination of genome replication with segregation. his is critical in organisms with tightly-regulated ploidy, such as . coli, ulfolobus and most eukaryotes12. owever, . volcanii is highly polyploid, tolerates variation in genome copy number26 and there is no evidence for a regulated cell cycle (. uggin, personal communication). e suggest that the high ploidy of . volcanii enables the accelerated growth of origin-less strains, in contrast to the growth defects observed in . coli23. ith a ploidy of 20, . volcanii can rely on stochastic partitioning to ensure that daughter cells inherit a genome complement. owever, it is vital that these 20 genome sequences are equalized to prevent the accumulation of recessive mutations, and this requires efficient recombination. n yeast, a screen for gene deletions that are lethal in polyploid cells found that almost all such mutations affect genomic stability, notably by impairing recombination27. herefore, polyploidy creates a situation (in yeast) where homologous recombination becomes essential; it follows that naturally polyploid organisms such as . volcanii are heavily reliant upon recombination. ndeed, rad. A mutants of H. volcanii suffer a more severe growth defect than recA mutants of E. coli20.
</sections.12>

<sections.13>
In . volcanii, origin-dependent initiation of replication appears to offer no demonstrable advantage; however, cells lacking individual origins are disadvantaged. e propose that origins are selfish genetic elements that ensure their own replication. ver time, origins become integrated with cellular processes such as the cell cycle, to coordinate genome duplication, segregation and cell division; ultimately this results in reduced ploidy. ropagation of selfish elements within a population requires a sexual process and lateral gene transfer by cell mating has been observed in . volcanii28. t is notable that most archaeal origins are adjacent to the gene for their cognate initiator protein 11. uch tight linkage, which is typical of selfish elements, ensures that origins acquired by lateral gene transfer can successfully subvert the replicative machinery of their host. his is known as the replicon takeover hypothesis, where the host cell chromosome becomes dependent on extra-chromosomal elements for its propagation29. he replicon takeover hypothesis has until now focused on the  replication apparatus, but our findings suggest that origins can also behave as selfish genetic elements.In H. volcanii, origin-dependent initiation of replication appears to offer no demonstrable advantage; however, cells lacking individual origins are disadvantaged. We propose that origins are selfish genetic elements that ensure their own replication. Over time, origins become integrated with cellular processes such as the cell cycle, to coordinate genome duplication, segregation and cell division; ultimately this results in reduced ploidy. Propagation of selfish elements within a population requires a sexual process and lateral gene transfer by cell mating has been observed in H. volcanii28. It is notable that most archaeal origins are adjacent to the gene for their cognate initiator protein ORC11. Such tight linkage, which is typical of selfish elements, ensures that origins acquired by lateral gene transfer can successfully subvert the replicative machinery of their host. This is known as the replicon takeover hypothesis, where the host cell chromosome becomes dependent on extra-chromosomal elements for its propagation29. The replicon takeover hypothesis has until now focused on the DNA replication apparatus, but our findings suggest that origins can also behave as selfish genetic elements.
</sections.13>

<sections.14>
Methods
eagents. Strains, plasmids, oligonucleotides and probes are given in Extended Data Tables 2-4. H. volcanii was grown as described previously30. Pairwise growth competition assays were carried out as described previously21, except that wild-type and mutant strains were mixed in a 1:1 ratio (for further details see Source Data for Fig. 2c). Tryptophan gradient agar plates31 were cast from a tapered wedge of Hv-Ca agar30 containing 0.25 mM tryptophan, which was overlaid with a converse wedge of Hv-Ca agar.Molecular genetic methodsTransformation of H. volcanii and genomic deletions were carried out as described previously30. Standard molecular techniques were used, pulsed field gels were carried out as described previously21. Genomic DNA for deep sequencing was isolated from 100 ml Hv-YPC culture in stationary phase (A650 >1) or 1 L in exponential phase (A650 ~0.1) as described previously30, followed by phenol:chloroform extraction. For flow cytometry, live cells in exponential phase (A650 ~0.1) were stained with acridine orange and immediately analyzed using an Apogee A40 as described previously26,32; 50000 cells were counted, doublet signals were removed by gating on peak/area plots and data analyzed using FlowJo (TreeStar Inc.).SOLiD sequencing and data analysisLibrary preparation and sequencing was performed by DeepSeq (University of Nottingham) according to SOLiD instructions. Sequence reads were mapped to the H. volcanii genome (accession numbers: CP001953-CP001957) using BioScope (version 1.3.1). Custom Perl scripts were used to calculate and plot replication profiles as described previously5. Deep sequencing data are available here: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE41961Identification of SNPsSingle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present at >50% prevalence and with a coverage of >10x (mean genome-wide coverage is ~150x) are shown in Extended Data Table 1. Five SNPs were identified in the strain lacking all chromosomal origins (H1546) and four of these SNPs are already present in the oriC+ parent strain (H53). The remaining SNP leads to a predicted glycine to valine change in the hypothetical protein HVO_A0627, this mutation is already present in the Ξ”oriC1,2 parent (H1340). However, it is absent from its Ξ”oriC1::trpA+ Ξ”oriC2 parent (H1293) and both these strains grow at near-identical rates (Source Data for Fig. 2c).Isolation of oriC3 by genetic screen for autonomously replicating sequencesWe previously showed that genetic screens in H. volcanii isolate a single origin at a time, and that this can be circumvented by using origin deletion mutants4. Therefore, we deleted oriC1 in a Ξ”ori-pHV1 background, so that genetic screens would not be dominated by these two origins. Note that ori-pHV1 was previously named ori-pHV1/4; this sequence hybridizes to two bands of ~690 kb and 86 kb on a pulsed field gel, which correspond in size to pHV4 and pHV1, respectively4. However, it is now clear that pHV4 has integrated on the main chromosome in laboratory strains, therefore ori-pHV1/4 cannot be present on pHV4. Consequently, we have renamed this origin as ori-pHV1 and renamed ori-pHV4-2 as ori-pHV4. To delete oriC1, the EcoRI-BspEI oriC1 duplex unwinding element (DUE) fragment of pTA441 was replaced with the BamHI-XbaI hdrB+ selectable marker from pTA187 to generate the oriC1 deletion construct pTA946. Strain H300 was transformed with pTA946 as described previously30, to generate the Ξ”oriC1::hdrB+ mutant H1023. Genomic DNA from strain H1023 was prepared as described previously30, 25 ΞΌg was partially digested with 0.5 units/ΞΌg of AciI for 30 minutes and fragments of 4-8 kb were ligated in the ClaI site of plasmid pTA131. One ΞΌg of this genomic library was used to transform the recombination-deficient strain H112, plasmid DNAs from six transformants were passaged through E. coli and sequenced. All six clones contained the autonomously replicating oriC3 region (pTA1100; Extended Data Fig. 3).Identifying the integration of pHV4 into the main chromosomeGenomic DNA from wild isolate DS2 and laboratory strain H26 was digested with ClaI, KpnI or NarI (Extended Data Fig. 4). A Southern blot was probed with PCR products upstream (US; primers RFB5F and RFB3R) and downstream (DS; primers RFBF and RFBR) of the H26 profile discontinuity (Fig. 1b). The upstream 3646 bp NarI fragment and downstream 7478 bp KpnI fragment were isolated from H26 genomic libraries and cloned in pBluescript II SK+. The upstream clone pTA1238 and downstream clone pTA1236 contained chromosomal and pHV4 sequences (shown in Extended Data Fig. 4b), indicating that the entire 690 kb pHV4 had integrated into the main chromosome, by recombination between ISH18 insertion sequence elements HVO_0278 (chromosome) and HVO_A0279 (pHV4), as shown in Fig. 1d.Deletion of radADeletion of radA was carried out as described previously21. Briefly, the Ξ”radA::trpA+ construct pTA324 was used for chromosomal deletion of radA as described previously30, but in the presence of pTA411 for in trans complementation of radA to facilitate efficient homologous recombination. Deletion of radA results in slow growth, the fraction of slow-growing colonies (Ξ”radA candidates) that proved to be Ξ”radA was 94%, 100%, 43% and 12% for the wild-type, Ξ”oriC1, Ξ”oriC2 and Ξ”oriC3 strains, respectively. Only a single Ξ”radA Ξ”oriC1 Ξ”oriC2 Ξ”oriC3 colony (1 of 70 screened) was recovered, this strain had undergone a chromosomal rearrangement involving the part of integrated pHV4 containing ori-pHV4 (Extended Data Fig. 5). We were unable to delete radA from the strain lacking all chromosomal origins (0 of 455 slow-growing colonies screened).Generating tryptophan-inducible radA strainsPlasmid pTA1343 carries a recombinant radA allele under control of the tryptophan-inducible p.tnaA promoter22. The radA gene was cloned downstream of the p.tnaA promoter in pTA92733, from which a cassette comprising the t.L11e terminator, p.tnaA promoter, radA and t.Syn terminator was excised and linked to the hdrB marker from pTA18730, whereupon it was inserted between the upstream and downstream flanking regions of radA in pTA13130 to generate pTA1343 (Extended Data Fig. 6a). Further details are available upon request. pTA1343 was used to replace the native radA gene in H98 (wild-type, generating H1637) and H1608 (Ξ”oriC1,2,3,pHV4, generating H1642) as described previously30, except that transformants were plated on Hv-Ca+5-FOA containing 0.25 mM tryptophan to ensure expression of the p.tnaA-radA+ gene.
</sections.14>

<sections.15>
Supplementary aterial
1nformation about upplementary able 12upplementary able 1 | eep sequencing data3xtended ata igure 1 | orrecting for -bias in deep sequencing data. Sequence composition has previously been reported to influence the depth of sequence coverage34, therefore we investigated whether GC-content contributes to the noise in our data. Sequence reads from the wild isolate (DS2) stationary phase sample were analyzed with respect to GC-content. (a) For each 1 kb window of unique sequence the number of mapped reads was plotted against the GC-content of the window. We find a significant reduction in mapped sequence reads at elevated GC-content. A polynomial equation (inset and solid line) was fitted to the data. (b) For each 1 kb window of unique sequence, the read counts were plotted against chromosome position. (c) Using the method of Alkan et al.34, we corrected for GC-bias using the polynomial equation shown in (a) and then plotted the corrected sequence reads against GC-content. (d) GC-bias corrected sequence reads are shown plotted against chromosomal position. With no substantial on-going replication in the stationary phase sample, we can justify using this dataset to normalize the exponential phase data. Both normalization methods result in low noise when compared to studies that do not employ a normalization step35.4Extended Data Figure 2 | Replication profiles and copy numbers of mega-plasmidsRelative copy number plotted against chromosomal co-ordinate (kb) for pHV1 and pHV3 of (a) wild isolate DS2, (b) laboratory strain H26, (c) Ξ”oriC1 H1269, (d) Ξ”oriC2 H1267, (e) Ξ”oriC3 H1371, (f) Ξ”oriC1,2,3 H1374 and (g) Ξ”oriC1,2,3,pHV4 H1546. Each mega-plasmid is displayed linearized at position 0, the location of previously described origins4. The 6 kb pHV2 plasmid is not shown in the wild isolate due to the scarcity of data points; pHV2 is not present in laboratory strains (b-g). The pHV4 data for DS2 is shown in Fig. 1. Separate pHV4 data for laboratory strains (b-g) are excluded, since pHV4 is incorporated into the main chromosome in these strains (Figs. 1 and 3). (h) Relative copy number for each mega-plasmid was calculated using the GC-content normalized sequence counts from the stationary phase data for laboratory strain H26.5Extended Data Figure 3 | Characterization of oriC3(a) Sequence features of oriC3. Double-headed arrow indicates the autonomously replicating fragment recovered from a genomic library of H1023 (pTA1100; see Methods for details), solid arrows represent open reading frames and triangles represent repeats. The intergenic region upstream of orc2 is typical of archaeal origins, it is enlarged to show the sequence features of oriC3 (DUE: duplex unwinding element), HVO_0635 encodes a conserved hypothetical protein. (b) Sequence of intergenic repeats upstream of orc2 (numbered in panel (a), triangles show repeat orientation). Dark grey shading indicates match to consensus origin recognition box (ORB), bases conserved between repeats are indicated by light grey shading. (c) Plasmid-based assays for the three chromosomal origins. Recombination-deficient strain H112 was transformed with 1 ΞΌg of pTA441 (oriC1), pTA612 (oriC2) or pTA1100 (oriC3). Transformants were plated with 100-fold dilution on Hv-Ca and incubated at 45Β°C for 14 days. Numbers indicate transformation efficiency in colony forming units (CFU) /ΞΌg DNA. (d) GC-disparity of main chromosome in wild isolate DS2 (adapted from Norais et al.4), positions of orc genes and replication origins are shown. The lack of a nucleotide disparity inflection point at oriC3 suggests that this origin has been acquired recently or is used infrequently, consistent with the replication profile (Fig. 1a) and plasmid-based assay (Extended Data Fig. 3c).6Extended Data Figure 4 | Identifying integration of pHV4 into the main chromosome(a) Map of region around ISH18 insertion sequence element HVO_0278 on the main chromosome of wild isolate DS2, showing restriction sites and probes used to determine the integration of pHV4. (b) Map illustrating integration of pHV4 into the main chromosome of laboratory strain H26, by recombination between ISH18 HVO_0278 (chromosome) and ISH18 HVO_A0279 (pHV4). Regions upstream and downstream of the integration are depicted with the same restriction sites and probes shown in Extended Data Fig. 4a, in addition to the genomic fragments cloned in pTA1238 and pTA1236. (c) Restriction fragment length polymorphisms in the main chromosome of laboratory strain H26. Genomic DNA from wild isolate DS2 and laboratory strain H26 was digested with KpnI, ClaI or NarI, and probed with sequences upstream (US) and downstream (DS) of ISH18 insertion sequence element HVO_0278. The upstream 3646 bp NarI fragment of H26 was cloned in pTA1238, and the downstream 7478 bp KpnI fragment of H26 was cloned in pTA1236. See Methods for details.7Extended Data Figure 5 | Identifying chromosomal rearrangement in Ξ”oriC1,2,3 Ξ”radA strain H1553(a) Map of SfaAI restriction sites on the main chromosome of wild isolate DS2. The region around ISH18 HVO_0278 is shown with additional restriction sites and the probe. (b) Map of SfaAI restriction sites on the main chromosome of laboratory strain H26. The region downstream of integrated pHV4 is shown with the same restriction sites as in Extended Data Fig. 5a, and two additional probes (ori-pHV4 and bgaH) that hybridize to pHV4. (c) Map of SfaAI restriction sites on the main chromosome of Ξ”oriC1,2,3 Ξ”radA strain H1553. The region downstream of integrated pHV4 is shown as in Extended Data Fig. 5b. H1553 has undergone a chromosomal rearrangement involving part of pHV4 between ISH18 HVO_A0014 and ISH18 HVO_0278. These ISH18 elements are identical in sequence but in an inverted orientation (bold arrows), recombination between them results in inversion of the intervening sequence. (d) Restriction fragment length polymorphisms in H26 and H1553. Genomic DNA from wild isolate DS2, laboratory strain H26, Ξ”oriC1,2,3 strain H1501 and Ξ”oriC1,2,3 Ξ”radA strain H1553 was digested with SfaAI and displayed on a pulsed field gel. Southern blots were probed with the ori-pHV4 origin, bgaH gene (located on pHV421), and sequences downstream (DS) of ISH18 element HVO_0278. (e) Confirmation of restriction fragment length polymorphisms by ClaI, KpnI and NarI digests, probed with sequences downstream (DS) of ISH18 element HVO_0278; see also Extended Data Fig. 4.8Extended Data Figure 6 | Generating tryptophan-inducible radA strains(a) Map of p.tnaA-radA+ gene replacement plasmid pTA1343. (b) Map of region around radA, showing NspI restriction sites and the probe used to determine replacement of the native radA gene with the tryptophan-inducible radA allele. (c) Confirmation of radA replacement by p.tnaA-radA+::hdrB+. Genomic DNA from laboratory strain H26, Ξ”oriC1,2,3,pHV4 strain H1546, p.tnaA-radA+ strain H1637 and Ξ”oriC1,2,3,pHV4 p.tnaA-radA+ strain H1642 was digested with NspI and probed with the radA region. See Methods for further details.9Extended Data Tables Legend10Extended Data Table 111Extended Data Table 212Extended Data Table 313Extended Data Table 4
</sections.15>

</text>
