<title>
Timothy Syndrome
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Timothy syndrome is a multisystem disorder characterized by cardiac, hand/foot, facial, and neurodevelopmental features. The two forms are type 1 (classic) and type 2, a rare form caused by mutations in a transcript variant of the same gene. Cardiac findings include a rate-corrected QT interval of between 480 ms and 700 ms and congenital heart defects (patent ductus arteriosus, patent foramen ovale, ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). Hand/foot findings are unilateral or bilateral cutaneous syndactyly variably involving fingers two (index), three (middle), four (ring), and five (little) and bilateral cutaneous syndactyly of toes two and three. Facial findings include flat nasal bridge, low-set ears, thin upper lip, and round face. Neuropsychiatric involvement includes global developmental delays and autism spectrum disorders. Ventricular tachyarrhythmia is the leading cause of death, followed by infection and complications of intractable hypoglycemia. Average age of death is 2.5 years. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Timothy syndrome is diagnosed by clinical features and by the presence of one of three known mutations in CACNA1C, the gene encoding the CaV1.2 calcium channel. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment includes use of beta-blockers to maintain QT interval stability to prevent ventricular tachyarrhythmia. In some instances pacemakers can be placed during the first days of life to control 2:1 AV block and resultant bradycardia, but an implantable cardioverter defibrillator to prevent sudden cardiac death should be considered in all affected persons. Treatment for congenital heart defects follows usual protocols. Prevention of secondary complications: Because anesthesia is a known trigger for cardiac arrhythmia, close cardiac monitoring is warranted during surgery. Surveillance: Monitoring of serum glucose concentrations, especially in individuals treated with beta-blockers, because these drugs may mask hypoglycemic symptoms. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Drugs reported to prolong QT interval; drugs and dietary practices that could lead to hypoglycemia. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Although Timothy syndrome usually occurs as a result of a de novo mutation, in rare instances sibs could be affected because of parental germline mosaicism; thus, monitoring of fetal cardiac rate and function during at-risk pregnancies is warranted. GENETIC COUNSELING: Timothy syndrome types 1 and 2 are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Timothy syndrome usually results from a de novo mutation. The risk to sibs of a proband is small; however, because parental germline mosaicism occurs, the sibs of a proband may be at increased risk of inheriting a CACNA1C mutation. Prenatal testing is possible for pregnancies at increased risk in families in which the disease-causing mutation has been identified.
</abstract>

</text>
