<title>
Leptin, gastrointestinal and stress hormones in response to exercise in fasted or fed subjects and before or after blood donation.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Leptin, an ob gene product of adipocytes, plays a key role in the control of food intake and energy expenditure but little is known about leptin response to strenuous exercise in fasted and fed subjects or before and after blood donation. This study was designed to determine the immediate effects of strenuous exercise in healthy volunteers under fasting or fed conditions and before and one day after blood donation (450 ml) on plasma levels of leptin and gut hormones [gastrin, cholecystokinin (CCK), pancreatic polypeptide (PP) and insulin], as well as on "stress" hormones (cortisol, catecholamines and growth hormone. Two groups (A and B) of healthy non-smoking male volunteers were studied. All subjects performed incremental exercise tests until exhaustion (up to maximal oxygen uptake--VO2max), followed by 2 h of rest session. Group A perfomed the tests on a treadmill, while group B on a cycloergometer. In group A, one exercise was performed under fasting conditions and the second following ingestion of a standard liquid meal. In group B, one exercise test was performed as a control test and the second 24 h after blood donation (450 ml). Blood samples were withdrawn 5 min before the start of the test, at the VO2max, and 2 h after finishing the exercise. No significant change in plasma teptin were observed both immediately and 2 h after the exercise in fasted subjects, but after the meal the plasma leptin at VO2max and 2 h after the test was significantly higher, while after blood donation was significantly reduced. The postprandial rise in plasma leptin was accompanied by a marked increment in gut hormones; gastrin, CCK and PP and stress hormones such as norepinephrine, cortisol and GH. These hormonal changes could contribute to the postprandial rise in plasma leptin concentrations, while the fall of leptin after blood donation could be attributed to the inadequate response of stress hormones and autonomic nervous system to exhausting exercise. We conclude that strenuous physical exercise; 1) fails to affect plasma leptin level but when performed after meal but not after blood withdrawal it results in an increase and fall in plasma leptin, and 2) the release of gut hormones (gastrin, CCK and PP) and stress hormones (norepinephrine, cortisol, GH) increase immediately after exercise independently of feeding or blood donation and 3) following blood donation the strenuous exercise resulted in a marked reduction in the plasma leptin, cortisol and GH concentrations, possibly due to the impairment in the autonomic nervous control of these hormones.
</abstract>

</text>
