<title>
[Sudden cardiac death in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Identification of high-risk patients].
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a relatively frequent, genetically determined primary cardiomyopathy, characterized by most often asymmetric hypertrophy of the ventricular septum with or without systolic obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract. HCM is a genetically heterogeneous disease, with 12 different disease-causing genes beeing indentified to date. Histologically the disease is characterized by hypertophy and disarray of myofibrils as well as by an increase in myocardial fibrosis. Clinically, these changes may lead to palpitations, dyspnoe on exertion, and/or angina pectoris. However, they also lead to an increased propensity to the development of severe ventricular tachyarrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. The incidence of sudden death is significantly increased in HCM, particularly in affected young subjects. Risk stratification in HCM should include a complete clinical-cardiological evaluation that should also consider new diagnostic features, e. g. MR imaging. Major risk factors for sudden cardiac death include a survived cardiac arrest (ventricular fibrillation), non-sustained and sustained ventricular tachycardia, a history of premature familial sudden death, unexplained syncope, an abnormal blood pressure response on exercise, and left ventricular thickness greater than or equal to 3 cm. Ideally, risk stratification should also include genetic testing, since some gene mutations seem to be associated with a higher risk for sudden cardiac death than others. However, genetic testing in HCM in not yet available on a routine basis. The implantation of a cardioverter/defibrillator is first-line therapy in patients with documented ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation or patients who have survived sudden cardiac death. These devices also play an important role in the primary prevention of sudden cardiac death in HCM. Algorithms and scores are available to estimate the risk of sudden death, however, the decision to implant a cardioverter/defibrillator remains an individual decision in every single patient.
</abstract>

</text>
