<title>
[Rheumatoid arthritis and pregnancy].
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
During pregnancy, oestrogen and progesterone levels are increased. Consequently the initial predominant immune cellular response (Th1 type) is decreased, whereas humoral response (Th2 type) is increased. Due to this switch, a lot of Th2 anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 are synthesized. During the last months of pregnancy Treg lymphocytes level is elevated leading to overexpression of IL-4 and IL-10. Due to these mechanisms, reduce disease activity of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) occurred. Impaired fertility has not been demonstrated in women with RA. However, some studies suggest that polyarthritis could induced a reduced weight at birth and more frequent pregnancy and delivery complications. Methotrexate and biotherapies have demonstrated no effect on fertility; however these drugs must be stopped before conception for a period equal to seven fold of the half live of the molecule. No teratogenic effect are known for sulfazalasine and hydroxychloroquine; these drugs could be used during pregnancy. It is also the same for ciclosporine, which used is quite unfrequent in RA. Methotrexate is teratogenic in animal models and is forbidden during pregnancy. For leflunomide which is metabolised in A771726, highly teratogenic, a washout period of 3,5 months is necessary. All commercially available TNFalpha inhibitors are classified by the food and Drug Administration as pregnancy risk category B: no adverse pregnancy adverse effects have been observed in animal studies, but there have been insufficient controlled human studies. The published experiences with TNFalpha inhibition in pregnancy is limited to some case reports and ongoing registry. More recently some cases of Vater syndromes (polymalformations) were possibly related to TNFalpha blocking agents. Such treatment must be avoided during pregnancy. Only few case reports are published concerning rituximab use during pregnancy. No data have been found for abatacept.
</abstract>

</text>
