<title>
Pathway analysis of cancer-associated microRNA targets.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Carcinogenesis is a multi-step process, which includes oncogene activation,             mutation silencing of tumor suppressor genes, impairment of chromosomes or epigenetic             changes such as CpG island methylation through various cellular pathways, involving             a series of somatic genetic alterations. Furthermore, miRNAs present a mechanism             by which genes with diverse functions on multiple pathways can be simultaneously             regulated at the post-transcriptional level. However, little is known about the             cancer-related pathways through which cancer-associated miRNAs (CA-miRNAs) regulate             these processes representing either positive or negative functions in carcinogenesis.             This study investigated eleven miRNAs previously identified as cancer-related             regulators. Using function and pathway analysis of their targeted genes, the relevance             of miRNA regulation in the induction of cancer can be observed. The results showed             that CA-miRNAs may function in the post-transcriptional level mainly through manipulating             the expression of transcription factors and protein kinases, and target genes             for the CA-miRNAs were most prominently predicted to function in the regulation             of transcription. Our analysis also highlighted the potential of these CA-miRNAs             to regulate the cell differentiation, proliferation, endocytosis and migration             signaling logically required to cause a cancer cell mainly through five canonical             pathways. Combined with previous cancer studies, the analysis of the relevance             between functions of CA-miRNAs and cancer-related pathways exploring different             internal carcinogenesis stimuli also revealed the potential of the top five pathways             to regulate core carcinogenesis processes. These findings should form a useful             knowledge base for potential future development of novel therapeutic treatments.
</abstract>

</text>
