<title>
Persistent Borna disease virus infection of neonatal rats causes brain regional changes of mRNAs for cytokines, cytokine receptor components and neuropeptides.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Borna disease virus (BDV) replicates in brain cells. The neonatally infected rat with BDV exhibits developmental-neuromorphological abnormalities, neuronal cytolysis, and multiple behavioral and physiological alterations. Here, we report on the levels of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), IL-1 receptor type I (IL-1RI), IL-1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1R AcP) I and II, glycoprotein 130, and various neuropeptide mRNAs in the cerebellum, parieto-frontal cortex, hippocampus and hypothalamus of BDV-infected rats at 7 and 28 days postintracerebral BDV inoculation. The data show that cytokine and neuropeptide mRNA components are abnormal and differentially modulated in brain regions. IL-1beta, TNF-alpha and TGF-beta1 mRNA levels were up-regulated in all brain regions following BDV inoculation. The same cerebellar samples from BDV-infected animals exhibited the highest levels of IL-1beta, IL-1Ra, TNF-alpha, IL-1RI, and IL-1R AcP II mRNA expression. The profiles of IL-1beta, IL-1Ra, TNF-alpha, and TGF-beta1 mRNA induction in the cerebellar samples were highly intercorrelated, indicating an association among cytokine ligand mRNAs. Cytokine mRNA induction was differentially up-regulated among brain regions, except for TGF-beta1. Specificity of transcriptional changes in response to BDV infection is also suggested by the up-regulation of cytokine and neuropeptide Y mRNAs associated with down-regulation of pro-opiomelanocortin, and with no change of IL-1R AcPI, dynorphin and leptin receptor mRNAs in the same brain region samples. Other data also show a differential mRNA component modulation in distinct brain regions obtained from the same rats depending on the stage of BDV infection. The conclusion of these studies is that cytokines may play a role in the neuropathophysiology of neonatally BDV-infected rats.
</abstract>

</text>
