<title>
Borna disease virus phosphoprotein binds a neurite outgrowth factor, amphoterin/HMG-1.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
The Borna disease virus (BDV) p24 phosphoprotein is an abundant protein in BDV-infected cultured cells and animal brains. Therefore, there is a possibility that binding of the p24 protein to cellular factor(s) induces functional alterations of infected neural cells in the brain. To identify a cellular protein(s) that interacts with BDV p24 protein, we performed far-Western blotting with extracts from various cell lines. Using recombinant p24 protein as a probe, we detected a 30-kDa protein in all cell lines examined. Binding between the 30-kDa and BDV p24 proteins was also demonstrated using BDV p24 affinity and ion-exchange chromatography columns. Microsequence analysis of the purified 30-kDa protein revealed that its N terminus showed complete homology with rat amphoterin protein, which is a neurite outgrowth factor abundant in the brain during development. Mammalian two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses also confirmed that amphoterin is a specific target for the p24 protein in vivo. Furthermore, we showed that infection by BDV, as well as purified p24 protein in the medium, significantly decreased cell process outgrowth of cells grown on laminin, indicating the functional inhibition of amphoterin by interaction with the p24 protein. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed decreased levels of amphoterin protein at the leading edges of BDV-infected cells. Moreover, the expression of the receptor for advanced glycation end products, of which the extracellular moiety is a receptor for amphoterin, was not significantly activated in BDV-infected cells during the process of extension, suggesting that the secretion of amphoterin from the cell surface is inhibited by the binding of the p24 protein. These results suggested that BDV infection may cause direct damage in the developing brain by inhibiting the function of amphoterin due to binding by the p24 phosphoprotein.
</abstract>

</text>
