<title>
RAM function is dependent on Kapβ2-mediated nuclear entry.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Eukaryotic gene expression is dependent on the modification of the first transcribed nucleotide of pre-mRNA by the addition of the 7-methylguanosine cap. The cap protects transcripts from exonucleases and recruits complexes which mediate transcription elongation, processing and translation initiation. The cap is synthesized by a series of reactions which link 7-methylguanosine to the first transcribed nucleotide via a 5' to 5' triphosphate bridge. In mammals, cap synthesis is catalysed by the sequential action of RNGTT (RNA guanylyltransferase and 5'-phosphatase) and RNMT (RNA guanine-7 methyltransferase), enzymes recruited to RNA pol II (polymerase II) during the early stages of transcription. We recently discovered that the mammalian cap methyltransferase is a heterodimer consisting of RNMT and the RNMT-activating subunit RAM (RNMT-activating mini-protein). RAM activates and stabilizes RNMT and thus is critical for cellular cap methylation and cell viability. In the present study we report that RNMT interacts with the N-terminal 45 amino acids of RAM, a domain necessary and sufficient for maximal RNMT activation. In contrast, smaller components of this RAM domain are sufficient to stabilize RNMT. RAM functions in the nucleus and we report that nuclear import of RAM is dependent on PY nuclear localization signals and Kapβ2 (karyopherin β2) nuclear transport protein.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
I
n eukaryotes,  pol  (polymerase ) transcripts are synthesized as precursors which undergo a complex series of processing events prior to translation. he first processing event is the addition of the cap, an inverted 7-methylguanosine group joined to the first transcribed nucleotide via a 5β€² to 5β€² triphosphate bridge [1β€“4]. n higher eukaryotes the first transcribed nucleotides are also methylated in a variety of species-specific configurations. he cap is uniquely found on  pol  transcripts and is critical for transcript expression. he cap structure protects transcripts from exonucleases and recruits complexes, including  (cap-binding complex) and e. IF4F (eukaryotic initiation factor 4F) complex, which mediate transcription elongation, splicing, nuclear export and translation initiation [1]. The cap is present on the transcript throughout its lifetime and the process of decapping initiates RNA degradation [5].
Nascent transcripts are synthesized with a 5β€² triphosphate on the first transcribed nucleotide to which 7-methylguanosine is added by three enzymic activities [1β€“4]. A triphosphatase removes the terminal phosphate and a guanylyltransferase adds guanosine monophosphate to create the structure G(5β€²)ppp(5β€²)X (X is the first transcribed nucleotide). Subsequently, an RNA cap methyltransferase methylates the guanosine cap on the N-7 position to create the basic cap structure, m7G(5β€²)ppp(5β€²)X. The capping enzymes are recruited to the phosphorylated RNA pol II C-terminal domain at the initial stages of transcription, which places them in the proximity of the emergent nascent transcript [6,7]. In mammals, the guanylyltransferase and triphosphatase are contained on a single peptide, RNGTT (RNA guanylytransferase and 5β€²-phosphatase), and the cap methyltransferase is a distinct protein, RNMT (RNA guanine-7 methyltransferase). RNGTT and RNMT are recruited to elongating RNA pol II [8,9], and are rate-limiting for gene expression and cell proliferation [8,10,11].
RNMT activity and expression were found to be dependent on a previously uncharacterized nuclear protein called RAM (RNMT-activating mini-protein) [12]. RAM increases RNMT cap methyltransferase activity 5-fold inΒ vitro and in cells RAM is required for transcript cap methylation. RAM also protects the RNMT protein from degradation, although the mechanism involved is not known [12]. Since RNMT expression and function is dependent on RAM, it is perhaps unsurprising that RAM was found to be critical for gene expression and cell proliferation.
RAM is a 118-amino-acid protein in humans and is conserved in vertebrate species. The amino acid sequence of RAM bears little homology to other human proteins (Figure 1A) [12]. Several functional domains have been characterized (summarized in Figure 1A). The N-terminal 55 amino acids of RAM contain the RAD (RNMT-activation domain), which interacts with RNMT and stimulates cap methyltransferase activity. Amino acids 56β€“90 form the NR domain, which has an enrichment of arginine and asparagine residues and binds to RNA. The NR domain is not required to increase cap methyltransferase activity inΒ vitro; however, it may increase the recruitment of transcripts to RNMT in cells. Amino acids 91β€“118 form the QYP domain which has an enrichment of tyrosine, glutamine and proline residues, although its function is unknown.
Figure 1The RAM RAD, NR and QYP domains are required for RAM function(A) Depiction of human RAM domains investigated in this study. RAD, amino acids 1β€“55, interacts with RNMT and stimulates its activity. NR domain, amino acids 56β€“90, is an RNA-binding domain. QYP domain, amino acids 91β€“118, is uncharacterized. Two PY NLSs at amino acids 98 and 114 are indicated. (B) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, RAM-GFP mutants or GFP alone. At 3Β days following transfection, Western blots were performed to detect the antigens indicated in cell extracts. Molecular masses are indicated in kDa. (C) HeLa cells were co-transfected with RAM or control siRNA (c), and pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, RAM-GFP mutants or GFP alone. At 3Β days after transfection the number of cells relative to siRNA control/pcDNA5 GFP transfection were calculated. The histogram depicts the average for three independent experiments and the error bars indicateΒ±S.D. ***P<0.001 using Student's t test in comparison with RAM siRNA/pcDNA5 GFP transfection.In the present study we determine that all three domains of RAM are critical for RAM function and characterize the QYP domain as a mediator of nuclear import.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
M  
ell culture and transfections. HeLa and HEK (human embryonic kidney)-293 cells were cultured in DMEM (Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium)/10% FBS, in 5% CO2 at 37Β°C. HeLa cells were transiently transfected with pcDNA5- or pcDNA4-based constructs in 6-well dishes using Lipofectamineβ„Ά 2000 (Invitrogen). HEK-293 cells were transiently transfected with pcDNA4-based constructs using calcium phosphate. siRNA was purchased from the Dharmacon siGENOME collection [RAM, D-021286-01; RNMT, D-019525-01; KapΞ²2-1 (karyopherin Ξ²2-1), D-011308-01; KapΞ²2-2, D-011308-02], and transfected using Lipofectamineβ„Ά RNAiMAX (Invitrogen). Non-targeting siRNA (D-001210-02) was used as a negative control. Cells were lysed 48Β h post-transfection.Cell proliferationHeLa cells (105) were transfected with 50Β ΞΌM siRNA and 0.5Β ΞΌg of pcDNA5 HA-RNMT and 0.5Β ΞΌg of pcDNA5 Fg-RAM or RAM-GFP expression constructs, using Lipofectamineβ„Ά 2000 (Invitrogen). The cDNAs utilized were resistant to siRNA via silent mutation of wobble codons. Two days following transfection, cells were counted using a Countess cell counter (Invitrogen).CloningConstructs were created using standard cloning procedures. Constructs were made resistant to siRNA by site-directed mutagenesis of the siRNA-binding site using the QuikChangeΒ® Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). RAM siRNA 1-resistant cDNA was made using the oligonucleotide 5β€²-GTT-TGAAGAGATGTTTGCGTCGCGCTTTACGGAGAATGACA-AGGAGTATCAGGAATACCTGAAACG-3β€². RNMT siRNA 1-resistant cDNA was made using the oligonucleotide, 5β€²-AGCC-ATATCCTGCAAATGAGTCCAGCAAGTTAGTCAGCGAGA-AGGTGGATGACTATGAACATGCAGC-3β€². All constructs were sequence verified. Primers are available on request.Cell extract preparation and immunoprecipitationCell extracts were lysed in Triton lysis buffer (10Β mM Tris/HCl, pHΒ 7.5, 50Β mM NaCl, 50Β mM NaF, 30Β mM Na4P2O7, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors) and debris was removed by centrifugation at 15000Β g for 15Β min at 4Β°C. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford reagent and diluted to 1Β mg/ml. For immunoprecipitations, 0.5Β mg of cellular proteins were incubated with 1Β ΞΌg of polyclonal RNMT antibodies or isotype control plus 25Β ΞΌl of Protein A/Gβ€“Sepharose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 10Β ΞΌl of anti-HA (haemagglutinin) agarose (Sigma) or 10Β ΞΌl of GFP-Trap (ChromoTek) for 4Β h at 4Β°C. Resins were washed in Triton lysis buffer (10Β mM Tris/HCl, pHΒ 7.5, 50Β mM NaCl, 50Β mM NaF, 30Β mM Na4P2O7, 10% glycerol and 0.5% Triton X-100) and resuspended in 50Β ΞΌl of Laemmli buffer. A total of 20% of the immunoprecipitate and 10Β ΞΌg of input were resolved by SDS/PAGE.Western blottingProteins resolved by SDS/PAGE were transferred on to a PVDF membrane (Millipore). Membranes were incubated with polyclonal anti-RNMT antibodies (Cowling laboratory), polyclonal anti-RAM antibodies (Cowling laboratory), monoclonal anti-HA antibodies (Sigma), monoclonal anti-GFP antibodies (Roche) and polyclonal anti-Ξ²-tubulin antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 1Β h at room temperature (18β€“22Β°C). Secondary anti-sheep, anti-mouse and anti-rabbit antibodies, and Pico chemiluminescence reagents (Thermo Scientific) were used according to the manufacturer's instructions.Recombinant protein productionpGEX-6P-1-based vectors were transduced into BL21(DE3) Escherichia coli cells and grown in LB broth. At a density of D600=0.6, 1Β litre cultures were induced with 0.5Β mM IPTG for 16Β h at 4Β°C. Cells were resuspended in 15Β ml of lysis buffer (50Β mM Tris/HCl, pHΒ 7.5, 150Β mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1Β mM EDTA, 1Β mM EGTA, 0.1% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.2Β mM PMSF and 1Β mM benzamidine) and sonicated 8Β times on ice for 15Β s. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation for 30Β min at 60000Β g. Glutathioneβ€“Sepharose (1Β ml, GE Healthcare) was incubated with the soluble material for 1Β h, washed in lysis buffer and protein was eluted in 5Β ml of elution buffer (50Β mM Tris/HCl, pHΒ 7.5, 150Β mM NaCl, 1Β mM EGTA, 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol, 1Β mM benzamidine, 0.03% Brij-35 and 50Β mM glutathione). The presence of RAM in the samples was verified by MS.InΒ vitro GST-fusion purificationRecombinant GSTβ€“RAM proteins (0.5 nmol) and 0.1 nmol of recombinant RNMT in 500Β ΞΌl of Triton lysis buffer were incubated with 15Β ΞΌl of glutathioneβ€“Sepharose at 4Β°C for 3Β h. Glutathioneβ€“Sepharose was washed in Triton lysis buffer and resuspended in 50Β ΞΌl of Laemmli buffer. Purified proteins and inputs were resolved by SDS/PAGE followed by Coomassie Blue staining or Western blotting. The binding assays of RAM and KapΞ²2 were performed as described previously [12a]. Briefly, 0.5 nmol of GSTβ€“RAM were incubated with 0.2 nmol of KapΞ²2Β in TB buffer (20Β mM Hepes, pHΒ 7.3, 10Β mM potassium acetate, 2Β mM magnesium acetate, 2Β mM EGTA, 2Β mM DTT and 20% glycerol). The complexes were purified with glutathioneβ€“Sepharose, extensively washed in TB buffer and visualized by Western blotting.Cap methylation activity assayThe cap methylation activity assay was performed according to [11]. A guanosine-capped unmethylated substrate 32P-labelled on the Ξ±-phosphate (Gp*ppG-RNA) was produced as follows. A total of 200Β ng of a 55-base strand of inΒ vitro transcribed RNA was incubated in a 10Β ΞΌl reaction at 37Β°C for 30Β min with 100Β ng of recombinant human RNGTT, 2Β ΞΌl (10Β ΞΌCi) of [Ξ±-32P]GTP and 1Β ΞΌl of RNAsin (Promega) in reaction buffer (0.05Β M Tris/HCl, pHΒ 8.0, 6Β mM KCl and 1.25Β mM MgCl2). RNA was purified by ammonium acetate precipitation. In the cap methyltransferase assay, 15Β nM GSTβ€“RAM or mutants were pre-incubated with 15Β nM RNMT at 4Β°C for 15Β min. A total of 2Β ng of capped RNA was incubated with the proteins and 100Β nM S-adenosylmethionine at 37Β°C for 10Β min in reaction buffer. Following the reaction, RNA was purified, precipitated and resuspended in 4Β ΞΌl of 50Β mM sodium acetate and 0.25Β unit of P1 nuclease for 30Β min at 37Β°C. Cap (Gp*ppG) and methyl-cap (m7Gp*ppG) were resolved in 0.4Β M ammonium sulphate TLC using polyethyleneimineβ€“cellulose plates. Standards were visualized by UV light to establish correct migration. Labelled spots were visualized and quantified by autoradiography, and percentage conversion of GpppG into m7GppG was calculated.RNA extraction and real-time qPCRRNA was extracted using GeneJET RNA purification kit (Thermo Scientific). PCR was performed using Quanta Biosciences SYBR Green FastMix for iQ. RNA (500Β ng) was converted into cDNA using Quanta qScript cDNA Synthesis kit. cDNA (0.2Β ΞΌl) was used in real-time PCR reactions. The primers used are available on request. PCR products were sequence verified.Fluorescence microscopyHeLa cells expressing RAMβ€“GFP were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10Β min, washed in TBST (TBS plus 0.1% Triton X-100) for 5Β min and permeabilized with 1% Nonidet P40 in TBST. Cells were washed for 10Β min in TBST and counterstained with 1Β ΞΌg/ml DAPI in TBST. Cells were mounted in 2.5% DABCO (1,4-diazadicyclo[2.2.2]octane) and visualized by fluorescence microscopy (Zeiss LSM 700). Endogenous RAM and RNMT IF (immunofluorescence) analysis was performed as described previously [12]. The nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio of GFP-tagged RAM mutants was calculated using the Volocity software (PerkinElmer). Briefly, DAPI staining was used to define the nuclei and phalloidin and tubulin staining was used to define the whole cell. The cytoplasm was defined by subtracting the nuclei from the whole cell. The average nuclear and cytoplasmic intensity of GFPβ€“RAM mutants from multiple cells in a single image was calculated. The nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio was estimated and the averageΒ±S.D. from 12 independent images is presented.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
R
he ,  and  domains of  are required for cell proliferation. In order to characterize and explore the relationship between the different RAM functions, a series of mutants were constructed. Full-length human RAM is 118 amino acids. The truncation mutants created were the RAD, amino acids 1β€“55; the NR domain (RNA-binding), amino acids 56β€“90; and the uncharacterized QYP domain, amino acids 91β€“118 (Figure 1A). Previously RAM had been demonstrated to be rate-limiting for mammalian cell proliferation; however, the critical domains had not been defined [12]. Therefore HeLa cells were depleted for endogenous RAM using RAM siRNA and transfected with pcDNA5-based constructs which express RAMβ€“GFP or GFP alone (Figure 1B). The RAMβ€“GFP constructs used throughout the present study have silent mutations which generate transcripts resistant to RAM siRNA. Two days following transfection, cells were counted and expressed as values relative to cells transfected with control siRNA and GFP alone (Figure 1C). As observed previously, inhibition of RAM expression resulted in a reduction in cell number, in this case to an average of 0.36-fold of the control for three independent experiments. Expression of RAMβ€“GFP partially rescued cell proliferation, resulting in 0.71-fold cells relative to control. Expression of GFP fusions of RAM 1β€“55, 56β€“118, 1β€“90 and 91β€“118 did not rescue the growth defect of cells depleted of endogenous RAM, with the average cell number not significantly different to that of the GFP control. Therefore the RAD (RAM 1β€“55), the NR domain (RAM 56β€“90) and the QYP domain (RAM 91β€“118) are all critical for RAM function.RAM 1β€“45 is necessary and sufficient to activate RNMTIn order to further probe the mechanisms by which RAM activates RNMT, the domains of RAM which interact with RNMT were mapped. The RNMT-interaction domain was previously mapped to the first 55 amino acids of RAM [12]. In order to determine whether smaller fragments of RAM maintain significant interaction with RNMT, a panel of RAM fragments was investigated (Figure 1A). The direct interaction of RNMT and RAM was investigated using recombinant proteins. GSTβ€“RAM and mutants were incubated with RNMT and GSTβ€“RAM complexes were purified on glutathioneβ€“agarose. RNMT co-purifying with GSTβ€“RAM and mutants was detected by Coommassie Blue-stained SDS/PAGE and Western blotting (Figure 2A). RNMT was found to bind to GSTβ€“RAM, but not GST alone. RNMT also bound to GSTβ€“RAM 1β€“55 and 1β€“45 equivalently to GSTβ€“RAM WT (wild-type), and with lower affinity to GSTβ€“RAM 1β€“35 and 20β€“45. An interaction between recombinant RNMT and GSTβ€“RAM 1β€“21 or 56β€“118 was not detected.Figure 2RAM 1β€“45 activates RNMT(A) Recombinant GSTβ€“RAM WT, truncation mutants or GST alone were incubated with recombinant RNMT. GSTβ€“RAM complexes were purified on glutathioneβ€“Sepharose, resolved by SDS/PAGE and co-purified RNMT was visualised by Coomassie Blue staining and Western blotting (WB). Molecular masses are indicated in kDa. (B) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 HA-RNMT or pcDNA5 (c), and pcDNA4 RAM-GFP (RAM WT), RAM-GFP mutants or GFP. Immunoprecipitations (IP) were performed with anti-HA and anti-GFP antibodies. Western blots were performed to detect GFP, RAM, HA and RNMT in inputs and immunoprecipitates. (* indicates cross-reacting antibody heavy or light chain). (C) Cap methyltransferase assay was performed using 15Β nM RNMT plus 15Β nM GSTβ€“RAM, truncation mutants or GST control. Protein complexes were incubated with [32P]GpppG transcript and S-adenosylmethionine for 10 mins. Following the reaction, transcripts were digested and GpppG and m7GpppG were resolved by TLC and visualized by phosphoimaging. A representative image is shown. The average fold change in cap methyltransferase activity compared with that generated by RNMT alone for six independent experiments is depicted. Error bars indicateΒ±S.D. ***P<0.0001 using Student's t test for results in comparison with RNMT plus GST. endo, endogenous.The RNMTβ€“RAM interaction was analysed in mammalian cells with similar results. HAβ€“RNMT, GFPβ€“RAM and RAM mutants were expressed in HeLa cells and their interaction was detected by immunoprecipitations performed with anti-GFP and anti-HA antibodies (Figure 2B). In anti-GFP antibody immunoprecipitations, RAMβ€“GFP, but not GFP alone, was observed to interact with HAβ€“RNMT, visualized by Western blotting to detect RNMT and the HA tag (Figure 2B, lanes 2 and 3). In anti-HA immunoprecipitations, HAβ€“RNMT was observed to interact with RAMβ€“GFP, but not GFP alone, visualized by Western blotting to detect RAM and the GFP tag. Anti-HA antibodies did not interact with RAMβ€“GFP when expressed in the absence of HAβ€“RNMT (Supplementary Figure S1 at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/457/bj4570473add.htm). In the anti-GFP immunoprecipitates, an interaction was observed between RAMβ€“GFP 1β€“55, 1β€“45, 1β€“35, 20β€“45 and HAβ€“RNMT. Conversely, in the anti-HA immunoprecipitates, an interaction was observed between HAβ€“RNMT and the RAMβ€“GFP mutants 1β€“55, 1β€“45, 1β€“35 and 20β€“45 (Figure 2B, lanes 4β€“9).Previously, we demonstrated that the first 55 amino acids of RAM are sufficient to activate RNMT inΒ vitro [12]. Since we observed that smaller fragments of this region could interact with RNMT (Figures 2A and 2B), we investigated whether these same RAM fragments are sufficient to activate RNMT. Recombinant GSTβ€“RAM was incubated with RNMT and an inΒ vitro cap methyltransferase assay was performed. Briefly, RNMT and RAM were incubated with the methyl donor, S-adenosylmethionine, and a guanosine-capped transcript, G(5β€²)ppp(5β€²)X. Following the reaction, the proportion of G(5β€²)ppp(5β€²)X N-7 methylated on the guanosine was quantified (Figure 2C). As observed previously, RAM WT and RAM 1β€“55 stimulated cap methyltransferase activity more than 5-fold compared with GST control. RAM 1β€“45 also stimulated RNMT activity equivalently to the WT protein, whereas the smaller RAM fragments, 1β€“21, 1β€“35, 20β€“45 and 56β€“118, had no effect on RNMT activity. Thus, although the fragments 1β€“35 and 20β€“45 can interact with RNMT, they are not sufficient to even partially activate the enzyme.RNMT is stabilized by fragments of RADA key function of RAM is to stabilize RNMT protein [12]. The domains of RAM required to stabilize RNMT were investigated using the RAM mutant panel. In Figure 3(A), pcDNA5 RAM-GFP and mutants were transfected into mammalian cells. Endogenous RAM expression was reduced by transfection of RAM siRNA, resulting in reduced RNMT expression (Figure 3A, lanes 1 and 2), and co-transfection of RAMβ€“GFP WT rescued RNMT expression (Figure 3A, lane 3). Endogenous RNMT expression was also rescued by expression of RAMβ€“GFP 1β€“55, 1β€“45, 1β€“35 and 20β€“45. This confirms that all RAM fragments that interact with RNMT, including RAM 1β€“35 and 20β€“45, can rescue RNMT expression.Figure 3RAM stabilizes RNMT against proteosomal degradation(A) HeLa cells were transfected with RAM or control (c) siRNA, and pcDNA4 RAM-GFP or RAM-GFP mutants. Western blots were performed to detect GFP, RAM, RNMT and Ξ²-tubulin. (B) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 Fg-RAM and pcDNA5 HA-RNMT alone or in combination with the relevant vector controls. Two days following transfection, cells were incubated with 10Β ΞΌM MG132, 20Β ΞΌM clasto-lactacystin Ξ²-lactone (c-Lactacys) or vehicle control at 8Β h before lysis. Western blots were performed to detect RAM, HA, RNMT and Ξ²-tubulin in cell extracts. Molecular masses are indicated in kDa. endo, endogenous.We investigated whether RAM stabilizes RNMT against proteasome-mediated degradation (Figure 3B). HeLa cells were transiently transfected with pcDNA5 Fg-RAM and pcDNA5 HA-RNMT, individually or in combination. As had been seen previously, transfection of either construct alone resulted in relatively low RAM and RNMT expression (Figure 3B, lanes 2 and 3), whereas co-transfection of both constructs resulted in significantly elevated expression of RAM and RNMT (Figure 3B, lane 4). Incubation of cells with the proteasome inhibitors MG132 or clasto-lactacystin Ξ²-lactone for 8Β h prior to lysis increased RNMT and RAM expression when cDNAs were transfected individually to levels approaching those found in the RNMTβ€“RAM co-transfection (Figure 3B, lanes 6 and 7). However, when RNMT and RAM were co-expressed, proteasome inhibitors had negligible effect on their expression (Figure 3B, lane 8). These data are consistent with the RNMTβ€“RAM complex protecting both proteins from proteasome-mediated degradation.RAM QYP domain contains a nuclear localization motifRAM is a protein which functions in the nucleus to activate and stabilize RNMT. RNMT has three classical lysine/arginine NLSs (nuclear localization signals), and mutation of all three simultaneously results in mislocalization of RNMT and loss of cell viability [13]. RNMT can be imported independently of RAM, since a mutant of RNMT, which does not bind RAM, is recruited to the nucleus [8]. Conversely, the mechanism by which RAM enters the nucleus is not known, including whether it requires RNMT.To investigate the RAM domains governing nuclear entry, HeLa cells were simultaneously transfected with RAM siRNA to suppress expression of the endogenous protein and with pcDNA5-based constructs to express Fg-RAM WT and mutants (Figures 1A and 4A). The Fg-RAM cDNAs used throughout the present study have silent mutations which renders them resistant to RAM siRNA. IF performed using polyclonal anti-RAM antibodies was used to detect RAM (Figure 4B). Anti-RAM antibodies were used rather than anti-Fg antibodies, since we have not found the latter to be effective at detecting Fgβ€“RAM by IF (T. Gonapoulos-Pournatzis and V.H. Cowling, unpublished work). The anti-RAM antibodies were raised against the WT protein and recognize epitopes throughout RAM (Figure 2) [12]. In control transfections, endogenous RAM was detected as a nuclear protein by co-localization with the DNA stain DAPI. Transfection of RAM siRNA inhibited the detection of RAM, confirming the specificity of the anti-RAM antibodies. Fgβ€“RAM WT was detected predominantly in the nucleus, whereas Fgβ€“RAM 1β€“55 and 1β€“90 were distributed throughout the nucleus and cytoplasm, suggesting that amino acids 91β€“118 are required for nuclear entry. However, Fgβ€“RAM 1β€“55 and Fgβ€“RAM 1β€“90 are poorly expressed, and Fgβ€“RAM 56β€“118 and 91β€“118 were undetectable by Western blot or IF (Figure 4A and results not shown). Furthermore, some of these truncation mutants may be small enough to enter the nucleus by passive diffusion and therefore may not provide useful information about the localization of the WT protein. Owing to the limitations of Fgβ€“RAM mutant expression, the subcellular localization of RAMβ€“GFP WT and mutants was also investigated (Figure 5A). The RAMβ€“GFP mutants used, 1β€“55, 56β€“118, 1β€“90 and 91β€“118, were all detectable by IF (Figure 5A) and Western blotting performed on cell extracts (Figure 1B). GFP expressed alone was distributed throughout the nucleus and cytoplasm, whereas RAMβ€“GFP was predominantly nuclear (Figure 5A). Similar to Fgβ€“RAM, RAMβ€“GFP 1β€“55 exhibited a localization defect and was distributed throughout the nucleus and cytoplasm, whereas RAMβ€“GFP 56β€“118 and 91β€“118 were predominantly nuclear. Since RAM 56β€“118 and 91β€“118 do not bind to RNMT (Figure 2), RAM does not require RNMT for nuclear entry. To quantify these observations, the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio was determined for RAMβ€“GFP and mutants using confocal microscopy (Figure 5B). RAMβ€“GFP WT, 56β€“118 and 91β€“118 had a significantly increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio when compared with GFP alone. Conversely, RAMβ€“GFP 1β€“55 and 1β€“90 exhibited a nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio equivalent to GFP alone and therefore a putative NLS maps to RAM 91β€“118.Figure 4RAM nuclear localization is dependent on the C-terminus(A) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 Fg-RAM WT, truncation mutants or vector control. Immunoprecipitations (IP) were performed on normalized cell extracts using anti-Fg antibodyβ€“agarose conjugates. Western blots were performed to detect Fg-tagged proteins, RNMT and Ξ²-tubulin in immunoprecipitates and extracts. Molecular masses are indicated in kDa. (B) HeLa cells were transfected with control or RAM siRNA and with pcDNA5 Fg-RAM WT, truncation mutants or vector control. IF analysis was used to detect RAM localization and DAPI staining was used to detect nuclei. The overlay of RAM IF, DAPI staining and bright field is also presented.Figure 5RAM nuclear localization is dependent on the C-terminus(A) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, RAM-GFP mutants or GFP. Fluorescence microscopy was used to detect GFP localization in HeLa cells and DAPI staining was used to detect nuclei. An overlay of GFP fluorescence, DAPI staining and bright field is presented. (B) The ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic GFP fluorescence was quantified. The average for 12 images is presented and error bars indicateΒ±S.D. ***P<0.0001 using Student's t test for average ratio in comparison with GFP control.RAM PY motifs are required for nuclear entryRAM does not contain a classical lysine/arginine-based NLS, but the QYP domain (91β€“118) does contain two putative PY-NLSs surrounding P98Y (PY1) and P114Y (PY2; Figure 1) [14,15]. PY-NLSs mediate nuclear localization via binding to the nuclear transport protein KapΞ²2 [16]. Three mutants were created to study the role of the putative RAM PY-NLSs. PY1AA has P98A/Y99A mutations, PY2AA has P114A/Y115A mutations and PY1/2AA has a combination of these mutations. RAMβ€“GFP and PY mutants were expressed in HeLa cells resulting in equivalent expression (Figure 6B). The subcellular localization of these mutants was investigated using confocal microscopy (Figure 6A). RAMβ€“GFP PY1/2AA was mislocalized to the cytoplasm and its average nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio was not significantly different from the GFP control (Figure 6C). In this experimental scenario the most influential NLS is PY1, since the PY1AA mutation had a significant effect on the RAMβ€“GFP nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, whereas the PY2AA mutation did not. However, since mutating both PY motifs simultaneously had the greatest effect on the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, both motifs appear to contribute to localization.Figure 6RAM nuclear localization is dependent on the PY domains(A) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, RAM-GFP PY/AA mutants or GFP control. Fluorescence microscopy was used to detect GFP localization and DAPI staining was used to detect nuclei. An overlay of GFP fluorescence, DAPI staining and bright field is presented. (B) Western blots were performed to detect GFP, RNMT, KapΞ²2 and Ξ²-tubulin in cell extracts. Molecular masses are indicated in kDa. (C) The ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic GFP fluorescence was quantified. The average of 12 images is presented and error bars indicateΒ±S.D. ***P<0.0001 and *P<0.01 using Student's t test for average ratio in comparison with the GFP control. (D) HeLa cells were co-transfected with RAM or control siRNA, and pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, RAM-GFP PY/AA mutants or GFP. At 3Β days after transfection cells were counted and the number expressed as relative to control/pcDNA5 GFP transfection. The histogram depicts the average for three independent experiments and the error bars indicateΒ±S.D. **P<0.001 using Student's t test relative to GFP control.Since the PY mutants are defective for nuclear entry, their ability to support cell proliferation was investigated (Figure 6D). HeLa cells were depleted for endogenous RAM using RAM-directed siRNA and transfected with pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, PY mutants or GFP alone. After 3Β days cells were counted and expressed as values relative to cells transfected with the control siRNA/pcDNA5 GFP (Figure 6D). Inhibition of RAM expression resulted in a reduction in cell number, to an average of 0.34-fold compared with the control for three independent experiments. Expression of RAMβ€“GFP partially rescued cell proliferation resulting in 0.66-fold cells relative to control. Cells expressing RAMβ€“GFP PY1AA, PY2AA and PY1/2AA did not proliferate at a significantly different rate to the GFP control.KapΞ²2 mediates RAM nuclear entrySince the PY-NLSs are required for nuclear entry of RAM, the functional relationship between RAM and the nuclear transport protein KapΞ²2, which binds to PY-NLSs, was investigated [15,16]. To investigate whether RAM and KapΞ²2 interact directly, recombinant GSTβ€“RAM and GST were incubated with recombinant KapΞ²2. GSTβ€“RAM and GST were purified by glutathioneβ€“agarose and KapΞ²2 was only detected in a complex with GSTβ€“RAM (Figure 7A). The KapΞ²2β€“RAM interaction was also observed in mammalian cells (Figure 7B). Mycβ€“KapΞ²2 and GFPβ€“RAM were expressed in HeLa cells. Immunoprecipitation of Mycβ€“KapΞ²2 from cell extracts using anti-Myc tag (9E10) antibodies resulted in co-immunoprecipitation of GFPβ€“RAM, but not GFP alone. The interaction of KapΞ²2 with RAM was inhibited by the PY1AA or PY1/2AA mutations and reduced by the PY2AA mutation (Figure 7C). This is consistent with the PY1AA mutation exhibiting a greater defect in nuclear localization compared with the PY2AA mutation (Figure 6C). If the KapΞ²2β€“RAM interaction is mediating nuclear entry, then inhibiting KapΞ²2 expression should reduce RAM nuclear localization. KapΞ²2 expression was inhibited with two independent siRNAs and a reduction in KapΞ²2 transcript and protein was observed (Figures 7D and 7E). A reduction in KapΞ²2 expression did not alter RAM expression (Figures 7D and 7E), but did result in RAM mislocalization to the cytoplasm (Figure 7F), indicating that KapΞ²2 is rate-limiting for nuclear entry of RAM. A desirable experiment at this stage would be to reverse the observations made with KapΞ²2 siRNAs using co-transfection of siRNA-resistant KapΞ²2 cDNA. However, we were unable to overexpress KapΞ²2, even using inducible constructs (results not shown). As independent evidence that KapΞ²2 mediates nuclear entry of RAM, cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding Myc-tagged M9M, a chimaeric PY-NLS peptide which adheres to KapΞ²2 effectively blocking cargo binding [17]. M9M was detected by IF performed with 9E10 antibodies, which recognize the Myc epitope. The presence of M9M inhibited nuclear import of RAM consistent with KapΞ²2 mediating nuclear import of RAM (Figure 7G).Figure 7KapΞ²2 mediates RAM import(A) Recombinant GSTβ€“RAM or GST was incubated with recombinant KapΞ²2. GSTβ€“RAM and KapΞ²2 complexes were purified on glutathioneβ€“Sepharose, resolved by SDS/PAGE and visualized by Western blotting. Molecular masses are indicated in kDa. (B) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 Myc-KapΞ²2 or vector control and pcDNA5 RAM-GFP or GFP. Immunoprecipitations (IP) were performed on cell extracts using anti-Myc antibodies. Western blots were performed to detect Mycβ€“KapΞ²2, RAM and Ξ²-tubulin in inputs and immunoprecipitates. (C) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA5 Myc-KapΞ²2 or vector control (c) and pcDNA5 RAM-GFP, RAM-GFP PY/AA mutants or GFP. Immunoprecipitations were performed on cell extracts using anti-Myc antibodies. Western blots were performed to detect Mycβ€“KapΞ²2, RAM and Ξ²-tubulin in inputs and immunoprecipitates. (D) HeLa cells were transfected with two independent KapΞ²2 siRNAs or control siRNA. After 2Β days RNA was extracted and real-time PCR performed to detect expression of KapΞ²2, RNMT and RAM. The average result for three independent experiments is presented and the error bars indicateΒ±S.D. (E) Western blots were performed to detect KapΞ²2, RNMT, RAM and Ξ²-tubulin in cell extracts. (F) IF was used to detect RAM localization and DAPI staining was used to detect nuclei. The overlay of RAM IF, DAPI staining and bright field is also presented. si, siRNA. (G) HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1 Myc-M9M or vector control. IF was used to detect RAM and Myc-M9M. DAPI staining was used to detect nuclei. The overlay of RAM or RNMT, DAPI staining and bright field is presented.RNMT localization was not detectably influenced by interference with RAM or KapΞ²2 function. Expression of RAM truncation mutants (Supplementary Figure S2A at http://www.biochemj.org/bj/457/bj4570473add.htm), inhibition of KapΞ²2 expression (Supplementary Figure S2B) or inhibition of KapΞ²2 activity (Supplementary Figure S2C) did not alter RNMT nuclear localization. Thus RAM and RNMT are imported into the nucleus using independent mechanisms (Figure 8). Once nuclear, RAM stabilizes and activates RNMT.Figure 8Summary of RAM functional domainsDepictions of the functionality of the RAM mutants used in the present study and previously [12].
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
D
ormation of the 7-methylguanosine cap structure on  pol  transcripts mediates key events throughout its lifetime and is critical for gene expression [1]. he enzymes which catalyse its addition,  and β€“, are rate-limiting for gene expression and cell proliferation, and their nuclear localization is required for cell viability [10,12,13]. e previously described three domains of the  activating mini-protein: , an -terminal ; a central -binding domain ( domain); and a -terminal uncharacterized domain which we called the  domain on the basis of the enrichment of glutamine, tyrosine and proline residues. n the present study we observe that all three domains of  are required to support cell proliferation (igure 1).
 nuclear localization is mediated by ap. Ξ²2Cap methylation is a process which occurs predominantly during the early stages of transcription, and therefore nuclear entry of RAM is critical for its function of activating and stabilizing RNMT. A major finding of the present study is the identification of the mechanism by which RAM is imported into the nucleus. We demonstrate that RAM has two PY-NLSs based around P98Y (PY1) and P114Y (PY2), which co-operate to promote nuclear import of RAM. The PY-NLS motif has a loose consensus sequence described as consisting of N-terminal hydrophobic or basic motifs and a C-terminal RX2β€“5PY motif [14]. Since the consensus sequence (and structure) is loose, PY motifs can only be confirmed by experimentation. Mutation analysis demonstrated that simultaneous mutation of both RAM PY-NLSs causes a localization defect indistinguishable from the GFP control (Figure 6). PY1 has a more significant role in nuclear import than PY2, since mutation of PY1 results in a more significant defect than mutation of PY2. PY motifs are recognized by KapΞ²2 (importin Ξ²), which binds to cargos and nucleoporins, thus targeting cargos to the nuclear pore complex [15]. We established that KapΞ²2 binds to RAM directly via an interaction with the PY motifs (Figure 7). Inhibiting KapΞ²2 expression with siRNA or inhibiting KapΞ²2 function with the M9M inhibitor inhibited RAM import, confirming the functional interaction of KapΞ²2 and RAM. Therefore RAM, in common with many other RNA-binding proteins, utilizes KapΞ²2-dependent nuclear entry [18β€“22].RNMT is imported into the nucleus by an alternative mechanism to RAM. RNMT contains three functional classical nuclear localization signals and binds to the importin-Ξ±β€“importin-Ξ² heterodimer [13]. Previously, we demonstrated that RNMT import does not require RAM. RNMT mutants which do not bind to RAM do not exhibit a localization defect [8]. In agreement with this finding, in the present study we confirm that import of endogenous RNMT is not significantly affected when the RAMβ€“KapΞ²2 import mechanism is inhibited (Supplementary Figure S2). However, we note that, although we cannot detect a defect in RNMT nuclear localization when we interfere with the RAMβ€“KapΞ²2 interaction or function, we cannot discount that a fraction of RNMT is imported in a complex with RAM (and vice versa).RNMT activation requires the entire interaction domainPreviously we had established that the first 55 amino acids of RAM are sufficient to activate RNMT. In the present study we determine that, although smaller fractions of this region are sufficient to interact with RNMT and stabilize the protein (Figures 2 and 3), the first 45 amino acids of RAM are necessary and sufficient to activate RNMT (Figure 2C). Currently the effect of RAM 1β€“45 on RNMT structure is unknown and further studies will be required to determine whether RAM alters the RNMT active site conformation and/or substrate and product affinities.In summary, we have identified RAM as having three domains; an N-terminal activation domain (RAD), a central RNA-binding domain (NR domain) and a C-terminal nuclear localization domain (QYP), which contains two PY-NLSs (Figure 8). The QYP domain is critical for RAM to enter the nucleus, where it activates RNMT resulting in mRNA cap methylation.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Online data
upplementary dataOnline data
Supplementary data
</sections.4>

</text>
