<title>
Tuberous sclerosis complex, mTOR, and the kidney: report of an NIDDK-sponsored workshop.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Remarkable basic and translational advances have elucidated the role of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling network in the pathogenesis of renal disease. Many of these advances originated from studies of the genetic disease tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), leading to one of the clearest therapeutic opportunities to target mTOR with rapamycin and its analogs ("rapalogs"), which effectively inhibit mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) by an allosteric mechanism. Clinical trials based on these discoveries have provided strongly positive therapeutic results in TSC (Bissler JJ, McCormack FX, Young LR, Elwing JM, Chuck G, Leonard JM, Schmithorst VJ, Laor T, Brody AS, Bean J, Salisbury S, Franz DN. N Engl J Med 358: 140-151, 2008; Krueger DA, Care MM, Holland K, Agricola K, Tudor C, Mangeshkar P, Wilson KA, Byars A, Sahmoud T, Franz DN. N Engl J Med 363: 1801-1811, 2010; McCormack FX, Inoue Y, Moss J, Singer LG, Strange C, Nakata K, Barker AF, Chapman JT, Brantly ML, Stocks JM, Brown KK, Lynch JP 3rd, Goldberg HJ, Young LR, Kinder BW, Downey GP, Sullivan EJ, Colby TV, McKay RT, Cohen MM, Korbee L, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Lee HS, Krischer JP, Trapnell BC. N Engl J Med 364: 1595-1606, 2011). In June 2013, the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases convened a small panel of physicians and scientists working in the field to identify key unknowns and define possible "next steps" in advancing understanding of TSC- and mTOR-dependent renal phenotypes. TSC-associated renal disease, which affects >85% of TSC patients, and was a major topic of discussion, focused on angiomyolipomas and epithelial cysts. The third major topic was the role of mTOR and mTOR inhibition in the pathogenesis and therapy of chronic renal disease. Renal cell carcinoma, while recognized as a manifestation of TSC that occurs in a small fraction of patients, was not the primary focus of this workshop and thus was omitted from panel discussions and from this report.
</abstract>

</text>
