<title>
Demonstration of the clathrin- and caveolin-mediated endocytosis at the maternal-fetal barrier in mouse placenta after intravenous administration of gold nanoparticles.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Exposure to nanoparticles during pregnancy is a public concern, because nanoparticles may pass from the mother to the fetus across the placenta. The purpose of this study was to determine the possible translocation pathway of gold nanoparticles across the maternal-fetal barrier as well as the toxicity of intravenously administered gold nanoparticles to the placenta and fetus. Pregnant ICR mice were intravenously injected with 0.01% of 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticle solutions on the 16th and 17th days of gestation. There was no sign of toxic damage to the placentas as well as maternal and fetal organs of the mice treated with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles. ICP-MS analysis demonstrated significant amounts of gold deposited in the maternal livers and placentas, but no detectable level of gold in the fetal organs. However, electron microscopy demonstrated an increase of endocytic vesicles in the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells in the maternal-fetal barrier of mice treated with gold nanoparticles. Clathrin immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting showed increased immunoreactivity of clathrin protein in the placental tissues of mice treated with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles; clathrin immunopositivity was observed in syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells. In contrast, caveolin-1 immunopositivity was observed exclusively in the fetal endothelium. These findings suggested that intravenous administration of gold nanoparticles may upregulate clathrin- and caveolin-mediated endocytosis at the maternal-fetal barrier in mouse placenta.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
The development of nanotechnology has resulted in rapid expansion of the use of nanoparticles
in various categories, e.g., food, cosmetic, electronic, medical and pharmaceutical industries
[15, 31, 32, 36, 39, 40]. ecause
nanoparticles have properties, such as an extremely small size (less than 100 nm in diameter),
high surface area per mass ratio and high potential chemical activities, adverse health
effects from the daily application of nanoparticles have been seriously considered [5, 9, 10, 24, 32, 34]. he fetus
is known to be susceptible to various toxic substances [1, 15, 39]. herefore, there is high concern regarding exposure to exogenous substances,
including nanosized materials, for pregnant women [12,
32, 39].The development of nanotechnology has resulted in rapid expansion of the use of nanoparticles
in various categories, e.g., food, cosmetic, electronic, medical and pharmaceutical industries
[15, 31, 32, 36, 39, 40]. Because
nanoparticles have properties, such as an extremely small size (less than 100 nm in diameter),
high surface area per mass ratio and high potential chemical activities, adverse health
effects from the daily application of nanoparticles have been seriously considered [5, 9, 10, 24, 32, 34]. The fetus
is known to be susceptible to various toxic substances [1, 15, 39]. Therefore, there is high concern regarding exposure to exogenous substances,
including nanosized materials, for pregnant women [12,
32, 39].
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
The placenta is the organ that connects the maternal and fetal circulation. xygen and
nutrient exchanges between the mother and fetus occur in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier at the
labyrinthine zone of the placenta [4, 11, 13, 14, 37]. n
addition, toxic substances can also transfer across the maternalβ€“fetal barrier. herefore, the
placenta is a critical site for fetal intoxication [10,
12, 32].
lacental structure differs among animals. uman and rodent have the same type of placenta,
hemochorial type. here are, however, some differences in the placental structures between
humans and rodents [12, 39]. uman maternalβ€“fetal barrier consists of one trophoblastic layer
(syncytiotrophoblast layer) on the maternal side with underlying discontinuous
cytotrophoblastic layer, basement membrane and fetal endothelial cells on the fetal side. n
contrast, mouse maternalβ€“fetal barrier has 3 trophoblastic layers on the maternal side that
connect each layer with tight gap junction with underlying fetal endothelial cells on the
fetal side [13,14,15, 32]. espite such anatomical differences, rodent placentas are regarded as advantage
of the ethical reason and of similarities in placental functions and have been used to study
the function of human placenta in every stage of pregnancy [12, 22, 32, 39].The placenta is the organ that connects the maternal and fetal circulation. Oxygen and
nutrient exchanges between the mother and fetus occur in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier at the
labyrinthine zone of the placenta [4, 11, 13, 14, 37]. In
addition, toxic substances can also transfer across the maternalβ€“fetal barrier. Therefore, the
placenta is a critical site for fetal intoxication [10,
12, 32].
Placental structure differs among animals. Human and rodent have the same type of placenta,
hemochorial type. There are, however, some differences in the placental structures between
humans and rodents [12, 39]. Human maternalβ€“fetal barrier consists of one trophoblastic layer
(syncytiotrophoblast layer) on the maternal side with underlying discontinuous
cytotrophoblastic layer, basement membrane and fetal endothelial cells on the fetal side. In
contrast, mouse maternalβ€“fetal barrier has 3 trophoblastic layers on the maternal side that
connect each layer with tight gap junction with underlying fetal endothelial cells on the
fetal side [13,14,15, 32]. Despite such anatomical differences, rodent placentas are regarded as advantage
of the ethical reason and of similarities in placental functions and have been used to study
the function of human placenta in every stage of pregnancy [12, 22, 32, 39].
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
The mechanisms of placental exchange for several endogenous substances include passive and
facilitated diffusion, via transtrophoblastic channels and active transport, e.g., via
endocytosis [4, 15, 32]. ndocytosis may be an important
mechanism for certain types of nanoparticle translocation across the maternalβ€“fetal barrier
[4, 15, 32]. acropinocytosis and classical clathrin-dependent,
non-classical clathrin-independent (caveolae-dependent) or clathrin- and caveolae-independent
endocytosis are further proposed as subtypes of endocytosis [6, 18, 21, 24]. lathrin, a major protein of
clathrin-coated endocytic vesicles, and caveolin-1, a major protein of the caveolae structure
[22], are expressed in trophoblasts and endothelial
cells of the human placenta during physiological condition. owever, information about the
expression of clathrin and caveolin-1 in the placental tissue during nanoparticle exposure
remains unclear. herefore, the present study aimed to examine the clathrin- and
caveolin-mediated endocytosis after intravenous administration of gold nanoparticles in mouse
placenta.The mechanisms of placental exchange for several endogenous substances include passive and
facilitated diffusion, via transtrophoblastic channels and active transport, e.g., via
endocytosis [4, 15, 32]. Endocytosis may be an important
mechanism for certain types of nanoparticle translocation across the maternalβ€“fetal barrier
[4, 15, 32]. Macropinocytosis and classical clathrin-dependent,
non-classical clathrin-independent (caveolae-dependent) or clathrin- and caveolae-independent
endocytosis are further proposed as subtypes of endocytosis [6, 18, 21, 24]. Clathrin, a major protein of
clathrin-coated endocytic vesicles, and caveolin-1, a major protein of the caveolae structure
[22], are expressed in trophoblasts and endothelial
cells of the human placenta during physiological condition. However, information about the
expression of clathrin and caveolin-1 in the placental tissue during nanoparticle exposure
remains unclear. Therefore, the present study aimed to examine the clathrin- and
caveolin-mediated endocytosis after intravenous administration of gold nanoparticles in mouse
placenta.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
M  
nimals: ixteen pregnant  mice at gestation day 16 (16) (15β€“17 weeks
old, 55β€“75 g) were obtained from  apan nc. (okyo, apan). ommercial diet -2 (
apan nc.) and tap water were given ad libitum throughout the experiment.
he mice were housed at approximately 25° and 55β€“70% relative humidity under a 12-hr
light/dark cycle. he experiments were approved by the nstitutional nimal are and se
ommittee, and all procedures were conducted according to the ottori niversity guidlines
for animal welfare.
articles morphology of gold nanoparticles: he experiment employed 20-
and 50-nm colloidal gold solutions (mean diameters of 19.6 nm and 49.3 nm respectively,
according to the manufacturerβ€™s information;  nternational, ardiff, ..). he
morphology of the gold nanoparticles was examined by transmission electron microscopy
(-100; apan lectron ptical aboratory, okyo, apan). he 20-nm and 50-nm colloidal
gold solutions contained electron-dense, spherical, uniform and individual or slightly
agglomerated particles (ig. 1ig. 1.lectron micrographs of 20-nm () and 50-nm () gold nanoparticles show
electron-dense, spherical, uniform and individual or slightly agglomerated appearance.
ar=100 nm.).
xperimental protocol: t 16, pregnant  mice were intravenously
injected with 0.5 ml of saline solution (control, n=4), 20-nm or 50-nm
colloidal gold solutions through the tail vein (n=6 per treatment). t 24 hr after the first
injection, the pregnant mice (17) were intravenously injected with the same solutions as
the previous injections. t 24 hr after the second injection, the pregnant mice (18) were
sacrificed by performing exsanguination under deep anesthesia induced by the intraperitoneal
injection of sodium pentobarbital. hen, tissue samples were collected.
ampling for maternal organs, plancentas and fetal organs: aternal
livers, placentas and fetal livers were collected from the pregnant mice and fetuses after
gross examination. he samples were used for histopathological, immunohistochemical,
autometallography () and transmission electron microscopy examinations.
nductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy (-): aternal livers,
placentas and fetal livers (0.1 g of each tissue; n=2 from the control or n=3 from mice that
were injected with gold nanoparticles) were digested with 2 ml of aqua
regia. fter digestion, the inorganic residues were dissolved in 5 ml of
0.05  l and ultrasonicated for 20 min, and the samples were then analyzed by performing
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy (-) ( 4500; gilent echnologies, anta
lara, , ...). etection and quantification limits for gold were 0.5
ng/ml and 1 ng/ml,
respectively [35].
istopathology: aternal livers, placentas and fetal livers were fixed in
10% neutral-buffered formalin. he formalin-fixed tissues were processed using routine
pathological methods and embedded in paraffin blocks. araffin-embedded sections
(4-µm-thick) were cut for hematoxylin and eosin staining,
immunohistochemistry and . istopathological examination was performed by 2 pathologists
in a blind manner under a light microscope.
utometallography (): araffin-embedded sections of placenta, maternal
liver and fetal liver were used for  staining [7,
8]. he sections were developed in a physical
developer consisting of 50% gum arabic, 50% citrate buffer, 5.6% hydroquinone and 17% silver
nitrate. he reaction was conducted in a water bath at 26° for 1 hr in the dark. xcessive
silver residue was removed with a 5% sodium thiosulfate solution for 10 min. ext, the
sections were counterstained with hematoxylin.  positive result was demonstrated as small
black silver grains inside the cells of interest.
mmunohistochemistry: araffin-embedded sections of the placentas were
used for the immunohistochemical detection of clathrin, caveolin, interleukin ()-6, tumor
necrotic factor ()-±, dimeric copper- and zinc-containing superoxide dismutase (u/n
), inducible nitric oxide synthase (i. NOS) and caspase-3. For antigen retrieval, the
sections were treated with citrate buffer (pH 5.4) and then microwaved. Endogenous
peroxidase activity was quenched with 3% H2O2 at room temperature for
30 min. The slides were then blocked with 10% normal goat serum (for the detection of
clathrin, caveolin-1, IL-6, TNF-Ξ±, Cu/Zn SOD, iNOS and caspase-3) or 10% bovine serum
albumin (for the detection of IL-6) for 5 min in a microwave. Next, the sections were
incubated with primary antibodies at 4Β°C overnight (anti-clathrin heavy chain: Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, U.S.A. 1:7,000 dilution; anti-caveolin-1: Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA, U.S.A. 1:1,500 dilution; anti-IL-6: Santa Cruz Biotechnology 1:200 dilution;
TNF-Ξ±: Monosan, Uden, the Netherlands, 1:15 dilution; anti-Cu/Zn SOD: Stressgen Bioreagents,
Victoria, Canada, 1:200 dilution; anti-iNOS: BD Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, KY,
U.S.A. 1:125 dilution; and anti-caspase-3: Promega, Madison, WI, U.S.A 1:250) or an
equivalent amount of phosphate-buffered saline as a negative control. A labeled streptavidin
biotin kit (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) was used to detect immunoreaction complexes in the
avidinβ€“biotin complex assay. Positive immunoreactions appeared as brown staining with
3,3β€²-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB). The sections were counterstained with
hematoxylin and observed by light microscopy in 4 randomly selected lesions at 100Γ—
magnification. Positive immunolabeling areas were analyzed in 5 randomly selected areas from
each group by using Image-Pro Plus 6.1 software (MediaCybernetics, Inc., Silver Spring, MD,
U.S.A.).
Double immunofluorescence: The sections were placed in citrated buffer
solution (pH=5.4), microwaved and then treated with proteinase K for 15 min for antigen
retrieval. Next, the sections were incubated with normal goat serum for 5 min in a
microwave. After incubation with normal goat serum, the sections were applied to the primary
antibodies against clathrin (1:500 dilution) or caveolin-1 (1:350 dilution) overnight at 4Β°C
and then incubated with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated secondary antibody (1:200 dilution) for 1
hr at room temperature. Then, the sections were reacted with primary antibody against
cytokeratin (Dako, 1:100 dilution) overnight at 4Β°C and then incubated with Alexa Fluor
555-conjugated secondary antibody (1:300 dilution) for 30 min at room temperature.
Thereafter, the sections were mounted in plain 80% Tris-buffered glycerol. Analyses were
performed with a confocal imaging system (AX-70, Olympus Laboratory, Tokyo, Japan).
Electron microscopy: Half of the longitudinal sections from the placenta
were cut into cubes measuring 1β€“2 mm3. Next, tissues were fixed in glutaraldehyde
for 3 hr at 4Β°C, rinsed in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), postfixed with 1% osmium
tetroxide for 1 hr, dehydrated in alcohol and embedded in epoxy resin. The areas of interest
were selected for electron microscopy examination from 1% toluidine-stained semi-thin
(1-Βµm-thick) sections and subsequently cut into ultra-thin (70-nm-thick)
sections. After staining with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, ultra-thin sections were
examined using a transmission electron microscope (TEM-100CX; Japan Electron Optical
Laboratory, Tokyo, Japan).
Western blot analysis: Approximately 100 mg of placental tissue (n=4 per
group) was harvested and processed in lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) to extract
protein. Tissue lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min, and the
protein content of the supernatant was determined. Lysate supernatants were diluted 1:1 with
2Γ— electrophoresis sample buffer (1Γ— sample buffer=125 mM Trisβ€“HCl, pH 6.8, 2% sodium
dodecyl sulfate [SDS], 5% glycerol, 0.003% bromophenol blue and 1% Ξ²-mercaptoethanol), and
aliquots equivalent to 20 Βµg of total protein per sample were resolved in a
15% SDS/polyacrylamide gel. The gels were electroblotted onto a polyvinylidene difluoride
membrane (BioRad, Hertfordshire, U.K.), and the membrane was probed with the primary
antibodies, rabbit anti-clathrin heavy chain (1:1,000 dilution) or rabbit anti-caveolin-1
(1:1,000 dilution). After overnight incubation at 4Β°C, the membrane was washed and probed
with the secondary antibody, which was an anti-rabbit horse radish-peroxidase-conjugated
IgG. After incubation for 1 hr, the membrane was washed. The immunoblot procedure was
performed using the chemiluminescence detection reagent (LuminataTM Forte Western
HRP Substrate, Millipore, Billerica, MA, U.S.A.) according to the manufacturerβ€™s protocol.
The bands on the clarified blots were measured with an image analysis system (Image-Pro Plus
6.1, MediaCybernetics, Inc., Silver Spring, MD, U.S.A.), and the digital numbers that were
obtained were integrated density values of the intensity of each band.
In situ apoptosis detection (TUNEL assay): Paraffin-embedded sections of
placenta were treated with proteinase K at room temperature. Then, the sections were
inactivated for endogenous peroxidase by applying 3% H2O2 for 5 min.
After washing, the labeling reaction mixture (consisting of TdT enzyme and labeling safe
buffer, in situ apoptosis detection kit: Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Japan) was
applied to the sections, and they were incubated in a 37Β°C humidified chamber for 70 min.
Following this, the sections were treated with Anti-FITC HRP conjugate (Takara Bio Inc.) and
incubated at 37Β°C for 30 min. After coloring with DAB, the sections were counterstained with
3% methyl green and observed under a light microscope.
Statistical analysis: All of the data were expressed as the mean Β±
standard error. Statistical significance was determined by performing the Mann-Whitneyβ€™s
U-test or the Studentβ€™s t-test for 2-group comparisons. For all
comparisons, P values less than 5% (P<0.05) were
considered statistically significant.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
R
β€“: old was detected in the maternal livers and placentas from mice
injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (able
1able 1.old contents in the tissues measured by -roup. Gold content (Βµg/g dry tissue)Maternal liverPlacentaFetal liverControl(n=2)0.2 Β± 0.07NDND20-nm gold NPs(n=3)640.3 Β± 171.80a)1.3 Β± 0.61ND50-nm gold NPs(n=3)99.2 Β± 2.75b)1.0 Β± 0.78NDValues are the mean Β± standard error. a) Significantly different between the control
and 20 nm gold NPs injected mice, P<0.05. b) Significantly
different between 20-nm gold NPs injected mice and 50-nm gold NPs injected mice,
P<0.05. NPs=Nanoparticles. ND=Not detected.). The level of gold in both maternal livers and placentas from mice injected
with 20-nm gold nanoparticles was significantly higher than the level of gold from mice
injected with 50-nm gold nanoparticles. Gold was not detected in maternal livers and
placentas from control mice and fetal livers from the control mice and the mice injected
with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles.
Histopathology: Placental tissues from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm
gold nanoparticles demonstrated no significant pathological changes at the maternalβ€“fetal
barrier in the labyrinthine zone of the placentas compared to the control mice (Fig. 2Fig. 2.Maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine zone of the placentas from control mice
(A) and from mice injected with 20-nm (B) and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (C). No severe
histopathological lesions are observed. Mild swelling of the cytoplasm (asterisks) of
syncytiotrophoblastic cells (T) and endothelial cells (arrows) are observed at the
maternalβ€“fetal barrier from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles.
Bar=50 Βµm.). Only mild swelling of the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblastic cells and fetal
endothelial cells in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from mice injected with gold nanoparticles
was occasionally observed (Fig. 2B and 2C).
No pathological lesions were found in other maternal and fetal organs from the control mice
and the mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles.
Autometallography: Silver-enhanced gold nanoparticles were detected in
Kupffer cells in the maternal livers of mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles
(Fig. 3B and 3CFig. 3.Autometallographic-enhanced gold nanoparticles in maternal livers (Aβ€“C), placentas
(Dβ€“F) and fetal livers (Gβ€“I) of control mice (A, D and G), mice intravenously injected
with 20-nm gold nanoparticles (B, E and H) and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (C, F and I).
Gold nanoparticles are demonstrated exclusively in the maternal livers from mice
injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles. The deposition of gold nanoparticles
is shown in Kupffer cells (arrowheads) (B and C). Autometallography shows negative
staining in all tissues from the control mice (A, D and G), placentas (E and F) and
fetal livers (H and I) from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles. Aβ€“C;
bar=10 Βµm; Dβ€“I; bar=25 Βµm.). Gold nanoparticles were not detected by using the AMG method in the placentas,
maternal livers and fetal livers from the control mice and placentas and fetal livers from
the mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (Fig. 3).
Immunohistochemistry: Clathrin immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive
reaction in syncytiotrophoblastic cells and fetal endothelial cells (Fig. 4Fig. 4.Clathrin immunohistochemistry showing intense positivity in the cytoplasm of
trophoblastic cells (arrows) and endothelial cells (white arrowheads) in the
maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine zone of placentas from mice injected with
20-nm (B) and 50-nm (C) gold nanoparticles. Weak positivity is shown in the cytoplasm
of trophoblastic cells (arrows) and fetal endothelial cells (white arrowheads) in the
maternalβ€“fetal barrier from a control mouse (A). Counterstained with hematoxylin.
Bars=100 Βµm.). Weak positivity was observed in syncytiotrophoblastic cells and fetal endothelial
cells at the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from the control mice (Fig. 4A) compared to mice injected with gold nanoparticles (Fig. 4B and 4C). The image analysis of clathrin
immunopositivity showed higher intensity in the placental tissues from mice injected with
gold nanoparticles. No significant differences were observed between clathrin
immunoreactivity in the placental tissues from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold
nanoparticles as seen by using image analysis (Table
2Table 2.Positive immunolabeling area in the labyrinthine zone of placentasGroup% Positive areaa)Anti-caveolin-1Anti-clathrinControl0.28 Β± 0.1792.73 Β± 0.43020-nm gold NPs3.57 Β± 0.718b)12.04 Β± 1.495b)50-nm gold NPs2.57 Β± 0.926b)9.10 Β± 1.618b)Values are the mean Β± standard error. a) Positive area (%) of 94,850
Βµm2 of 4-Βµm-thick paraffin sections. b)
Significantly different from the control group, P<0.05.
NPs=Nanoparticles.).
Caveolin-1 immunoreactivity was detected exclusively in the cytoplasm of fetal endothelial
cells at the maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine zone of the placentas (Fig. 5Fig. 5.Caveolin-1 immunohistochemistry showing immunopositivity in the cytoplasm of fetal
endothelial cells at the maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine zone of the
placentas (white arrowheads) from mice injected with 20-nm (B) and 50-nm (C) gold
nanoparticles. Weak positivity is shown in the cytoplasm of fetal endothelial cells in
the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from a control mouse (A). Counterstained with hematoxylin.
Bars=100 Βµm.). The positivity of caveolin-1 immunolabeling was lesser in the placental tissues
from the control mice (Fig. 5A) compared to mice
injected with gold nanoparticles (Fig. 5B and 5C).
The image analysis of caveolin-1 immunolabeling showed higher intensity in the placental
tissues from mice injected with gold nanoparticles. No significant differences were observed
between caveolin-1 immunoreactivity in the placental tissues from mice injected with 20- and
50-nm gold nanoparticles as seen by using image analysis (Table 2).
There were occasional positive findings in IL-6, TNF-Ξ±, Cu/Zn SOD and iNOS immunolabeling
in the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells in the maternalβ€“fetal
barrier. No difference in the intensity and distribution of IL-6, TNF-Ξ±, Cu/Zn SOD and iNOS
immunolabeling between the control mice and the mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold
nanoparticles was observed (data not shown). No positivity in caspase-3 immunolabeling was
detected in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from the control mice and the mice injected with 20-
and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (data not shown).
Double immunofluorescence: Positive clathrin immunoreactivity was
demonstrated in the syncytiotrophoblast layer and fetal vascular endothelium (Fig. 6AFig. 6.Double immunofluorescence of clathrin and cytokeratin proteins in the labyrinthine
zone of mice placenta. Double immunolabeling by using antibodies against clathrin as
shown by Alexa 488 (green) (A) and cytokeratin as shown by Alexa 555 (red) (B). Merged
image with the 2 fluorophores (C). The syncytiotrophoblast layer (white arrows) and
fetal vascular wall are strongly labeled with clathrin (white arrowheads) (A). The
syncytiotrophoblast layer is exclusively labeled with cytokeratin (white arrows) (B).
Co-expression of clathrin and cytokeratin (yellowish) is shown in the
syncytiotrophoblast layer (white arrows) (C). Bars=100 Βµm.). The co-localization of clathrin and cytokeratin was observed in the
syncytiotrophoblast layer (Fig. 6C). In contrast,
caveolin-1 immunoreactivity revealed strong immunoreactivity exclusively in fetal vascular
endothelial cells (Fig. 7AFig. 7.Double immunofluorescence of caveolin-1 and cytokeratin proteins in the labyrinthine
zone of mice placenta. Double immunolabeling by using antibodies against caveolin-1 as
shown by Alexa 488 (green) (A) and cytokeratin as shown by Alexa 555 (red) (B). Merged
image with the 2 fluorophores (C). The fetal vascular wall is exclusively labeled with
caveolin-1 (white arrows) (A). The syncytiotrophoblast layer is labeled with
cytokeratin (white asterisks) (B). Co-expression of caveolin-1 and cytokeratin is not
shown in the labyrinthine zone of the placenta. Bars=100 Βµm.). The co-localization of caveolin-1 and cytokeratin was not observed in the
labyrinthine zone of the placentas (Fig. 7C).
Electron microscopy: The maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine zone
of the placentas from the control mice consisted of 3 layers of syncytiotrophoblastic cells
(syncytiotrophoblast layers I, II and III) with underlying fetal endothelial cells. Electron
microscopy demonstrated no signs of cell/tissue damage in the placenta from the mice treated
with gold nanoparticles. Numerous microplicae and infolding with a few vesicle-like
structures were observed in the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblast layers II and III in the
maternalβ€“fetal barrier from the control mice (Fig.
8AFig. 8.Transmission electron micrographs of maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine zone
of the placentas. The placenta from a control mouse consists of 3 syncytiotrophoblast
layers with underlying fetal endothelial cells. Numerous microplicae and infolding
with a few of vesicle-like structures (arrowheads) are shown in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblast layers II and III in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from a control
mouse (A). Enlargement of the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblast layer I, II, III and
fetal endothelial cells with an increase in the number of vesicle-like structures
(arrowheads) is shown in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from mice injected with 20-nm (B)
and 50-nm (C) gold nanoparticles. Bar=0.5 Βµm. MS=maternal blood sinus,
I=syncytiotrophoblast layer I, II=syncytiotrophoblast layer II,
III=syncytiotrophoblast layer III, FE=fetal endothelial cell, FC=fetal capillary.). Moderate enlargement with an increase in the number of vesicle-like structures was
observed in the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblast layers II and III in the maternalβ€“fetal
barrier from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (Figs. 8B, 8C and 9Fig. 9.Transmission electron micrograph of the maternalβ€“fetal barrier in the labyrinthine
zone of the placenta from mouse injected with 20-nm gold nanoparticles demonstrating
an increase in the number of vesicle-like structures (arrowheads) in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblast layers I, II, III, and fetal endothelial cells. Bar=0.5 Βµm.
I=syncytiotrophoblast layer I, II=syncytiotrophoblast layer II,
III=syncytiotrophoblast layer III, FE=fetal endothelial cell, FC=fetal capillary.). An increase in the number of vesicle-like structures was also shown in the
endothelial cells in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold
nanoparticles compared to the control mice (Figs.
8C and 9).
Western blot analysis: Immunoblotting of tissue lysates from placentas of
mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticle solutions demonstrated a 171-kDa band of
clathrin protein. The positive band from the control mice was less intense compared to
positive bands from mice injected with gold nanoparticles (Fig. 10AFig. 10.Western blotting demonstrates clathrin and caveolin-1 protein expression in the
placental tissues from pregnant mice. The intensity of clathrin protein band (171 kDa)
of placental tissue lysates from control mice is less than the bands of tissue lysates
from mice injected with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (A). The intensity of
caveolin-1 protein bands is not different between the control mice and the mice
treated with 20- and 50-nm gold nanoparticles (B).). The integrated density values of the intensity of bands of tissue lysates from mice
injected with gold nanoparticles were significantly greater than those of the control mice
(Table 3Table 3.Integrated density values of the immunoblot band intensity using the image
analysis systemProteinDensity of immunoblot band intensity(optical density
unit)Control (n=3)20-nm gold NPs (n=3)50-nm gold NPs (n=3)Clathrin0.20 Β± 0.0621.05 Β± 0.029a)1.06 Β± 0.010a)Caveolin-11.46 Β± 0.1671.36 Β± 0.2241.55 Β± 0.095Values are the mean Β± standard error. a) Significantly different from the control
group, P<0.05. NPs=Nanoparticles.).
A 22-kDa band representing caveolin-1 was observed in the placental tissue lysates. The
positive bands showed no difference in intensity in the placental lysates from the control
mice and the mice injected with gold nanoparticles (Fig.
10B). The integrated density values of the intensity of bands of the tissue lysates
were not significantly different between all groups (Table 3).
In situ apoptosis detection (TUNEL assay): The TUNEL assay showed negative
results in the labyrinthine zone of the placentas of control, 20- and 50-nm gold
nanoparticle injected mice (data not shown).
</sections.4>

<sections.5>
D
t present, the risk of exposure to nanosized materials in pregnancy is increasing.
owever, there are only a few studies on the translocation pathway of nanoparticles across
the maternalβ€“fetal barrier (placental barrier) [5,
9, 15]. he
present study aims to determine the possible translocation mechanism of gold nanoparticles
across the maternalβ€“fetal barrier of mice.
- analysis demonstrated a significant amount of gold deposited in the maternal livers
and placentas, but no detectable level of gold in the fetal organs. lthough  staining
also showed the dominant accumulation of gold nanoparticles in upffer cells in the livers
of the pregnant mice, no  positive findings were observed in the fetuses after
intravenous administration. he liver is a major organ for the elimination of circulating
nanoparticles [29].  previous study also reported
that gold nanoparticles are primarily phagocytized by upffer cells and that almost of the
administered nanoparticles present in the liver after intravenous administration in rodents
[2, 29, 30, 33].
o pathological changes were observed in the placentas, maternal organs and fetal organs
from mice treated with 20-nm and 50-nm gold nanoparticle solutions, suggesting that gold
nanoparticles would not be harmful to pregnant mice and their placentas at the doses that we
used. revious in vitro and in vivo studies also reported
that various sizes and doses of gold nanoparticles showed no obvious toxicity to mice and
rats [17, 31,
33].
revious studies on the translocation pathway of nanoparticles across the fetalβ€“maternal
barrier of the human placenta suggest that endocytosis plays an important role in the
transportation of nanoparticles [12, 15, 32, 38]. n the present study on the mouse placenta, an
increase in the number of endocytic vesicles was also observed in the cytoplasm of the
syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells by electron microscopy, suggesting that
endocytosis was upregulated in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier after administration of gold
nanoparticle solutions. ndocytosis plays an important role for the transport of nutrients
or biomolecules, such as albumin, folic acid, hormones, etc. at the placenta in the
physiological condition [16, 27].
lathrin-mediated endocytosis was previously described in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblasts of the mouse placenta [16].
lathrin-mediated endocytosis is involved in the recycling of albumin in the term placenta,
neurotransmitter transport and the internalization of several antigens [16, 21, 23]. n this study, clathrin immunohistochemistry showed
an increase of intense positivity in the endocytic vesicles of both syncytiotrophoblasts and
fetal endothelial cells. he localization of clathrin expression was confirmed by performing
double immunofluorescence by using antibodies to clathrin and cytokeratin. lathrin was also
demonstrated in the syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal vascular endothelium. mmunoblot analysis
showed an increase in clathrin protein expression in the placental tissues from mice treated
with gold nanoparticles. hese results suggested that gold nanoparticle administration
upregulates clathrin expression in the placenta and that clathrin-mediated endocytosis may
be one of the pathways of gold nanoparticle translocation in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier.
aveolae-mediated endocytosis is also considered to be one of the pathways for the
translocation of nanoparticles in the airβ€“blood barrier [26]. aveolin-1 protein plays a role in the regulation of caveolar invagination
and the formation of caveolae, which is one form of the endocytic vesicle [19, 25, 27, 28]. n murine
placental tissues, the localization of caveolin-1 has been demonstrated in the vasculatures,
especially in the fetal vascular endothelium [3, 20, 22]. n this
study, increased intensity of caveolin-1 immunohistochemistry was observed exclusively in
the fetal endothelium after the administration of gold nanoparticle solutions. n contrast,
immunoblotting showed no difference in the amount of caveolin-1 expression between the
control mice and the mice treated with gold nanoparticles, suggesting the possible
re-assembly of caveolin-1 protein from the cytosol to the caveolae structure.
n this study with the experimental design, applied techniques including electron
microscopy failed to detect signs of actual translocation of the exposed particles as well
as signs of their toxicity. owever, an increase of endocytic vesicles in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier of mice
treated with gold nanoparticles was demonstrated.  further study with prolonged duration,
different kinds of nanoparticles and sensitive techniques for the detection of nanoparticles
is required to ascertain whether exposed nanoparticles may have a chance to be translocated
through the maternalβ€“fetal barrier by both clathrin-mediated and caveolae-mediated
endocytosis demonstrated in this study.DISCUSSION
At present, the risk of exposure to nanosized materials in pregnancy is increasing.
However, there are only a few studies on the translocation pathway of nanoparticles across
the maternalβ€“fetal barrier (placental barrier) [5,
9, 15]. The
present study aims to determine the possible translocation mechanism of gold nanoparticles
across the maternalβ€“fetal barrier of mice.
ICP-MS analysis demonstrated a significant amount of gold deposited in the maternal livers
and placentas, but no detectable level of gold in the fetal organs. Although AMG staining
also showed the dominant accumulation of gold nanoparticles in Kupffer cells in the livers
of the pregnant mice, no AMG positive findings were observed in the fetuses after
intravenous administration. The liver is a major organ for the elimination of circulating
nanoparticles [29]. A previous study also reported
that gold nanoparticles are primarily phagocytized by Kupffer cells and that almost of the
administered nanoparticles present in the liver after intravenous administration in rodents
[2, 29, 30, 33].
No pathological changes were observed in the placentas, maternal organs and fetal organs
from mice treated with 20-nm and 50-nm gold nanoparticle solutions, suggesting that gold
nanoparticles would not be harmful to pregnant mice and their placentas at the doses that we
used. Previous in vitro and in vivo studies also reported
that various sizes and doses of gold nanoparticles showed no obvious toxicity to mice and
rats [17, 31,
33].
Previous studies on the translocation pathway of nanoparticles across the fetalβ€“maternal
barrier of the human placenta suggest that endocytosis plays an important role in the
transportation of nanoparticles [12, 15, 32, 38]. In the present study on the mouse placenta, an
increase in the number of endocytic vesicles was also observed in the cytoplasm of the
syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells by electron microscopy, suggesting that
endocytosis was upregulated in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier after administration of gold
nanoparticle solutions. Endocytosis plays an important role for the transport of nutrients
or biomolecules, such as albumin, folic acid, hormones, etc. at the placenta in the
physiological condition [16, 27].
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis was previously described in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblasts of the mouse placenta [16].
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is involved in the recycling of albumin in the term placenta,
neurotransmitter transport and the internalization of several antigens [16, 21, 23]. In this study, clathrin immunohistochemistry showed
an increase of intense positivity in the endocytic vesicles of both syncytiotrophoblasts and
fetal endothelial cells. The localization of clathrin expression was confirmed by performing
double immunofluorescence by using antibodies to clathrin and cytokeratin. Clathrin was also
demonstrated in the syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal vascular endothelium. Immunoblot analysis
showed an increase in clathrin protein expression in the placental tissues from mice treated
with gold nanoparticles. These results suggested that gold nanoparticle administration
upregulates clathrin expression in the placenta and that clathrin-mediated endocytosis may
be one of the pathways of gold nanoparticle translocation in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier.
Caveolae-mediated endocytosis is also considered to be one of the pathways for the
translocation of nanoparticles in the airβ€“blood barrier [26]. Caveolin-1 protein plays a role in the regulation of caveolar invagination
and the formation of caveolae, which is one form of the endocytic vesicle [19, 25, 27, 28]. In murine
placental tissues, the localization of caveolin-1 has been demonstrated in the vasculatures,
especially in the fetal vascular endothelium [3, 20, 22]. In this
study, increased intensity of caveolin-1 immunohistochemistry was observed exclusively in
the fetal endothelium after the administration of gold nanoparticle solutions. In contrast,
immunoblotting showed no difference in the amount of caveolin-1 expression between the
control mice and the mice treated with gold nanoparticles, suggesting the possible
re-assembly of caveolin-1 protein from the cytosol to the caveolae structure.
In this study with the experimental design, applied techniques including electron
microscopy failed to detect signs of actual translocation of the exposed particles as well
as signs of their toxicity. However, an increase of endocytic vesicles in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal endothelial cells in the maternalβ€“fetal barrier of mice
treated with gold nanoparticles was demonstrated. A further study with prolonged duration,
different kinds of nanoparticles and sensitive techniques for the detection of nanoparticles
is required to ascertain whether exposed nanoparticles may have a chance to be translocated
through the maternalβ€“fetal barrier by both clathrin-mediated and caveolae-mediated
endocytosis demonstrated in this study.
</sections.5>

</text>
