<title>
Amifostine: chemotherapeutic and radiotherapeutic protective effects.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Amifostine (Ethyoltrade mark, Alza Pharmaceuticals) is an inorganic thiophosphate cytoprotective agent known chemically as ethanethiol, 2-[3- aminopropyl)amino]dihydrogen phosphate. It is a prodrug of free thiol (WR-1065) that may act as a scavenger of free radicals generated in tissues exposed to cytotoxic drugs and binds to reactive metabolites of such drugs. Amifostine was originally developed as a radioprotective agent in a classified nuclear warfare project. Following declassification of the project it was evaluated as a cytoprotective agent against toxicity of the alkylating drugs and cisplatin. Differences in the alkaline phosphatase concentration of normal versus tumour tissues can result in greater conversion of amifostine in normal tissues. Inside the cell, WR-1065 provides an alternative target to DNA and RNA for the reactive molecules of alkylating or platinum agents and acts as a potent scavenger of the oxygen free radicals induced by ionizing radiation and some chemotherapy agents. Preclinical animal studies have demonstrated that the administration of amifostine protects against a variety of chemotherapy-related toxicities including cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity, cisplatin-induced neurotoxicity, cyclophosphamide- and bleomycin-induced pulmonary toxicity and the cytotoxicities (including cardiotoxicity) induced by doxorubicin and related chemotherapeutic agents. Amifostine has been shown to protect a variety of animal species from lethal doses of radiation. Amifostine gives haematological protection from cyclophosphamide, carboplatin, mitomycin C, fotemustine and radiotherapy; renal and peripheral nerve protection from cisplatin; mucosa, skin and salivary gland protection from radiotherapy. Multiple Phase I studies were carried out with amifostine in combination with chemotherapy for various neoplasms. Appropriate doses of amifostine were found to be 740 - 910 mg/m(2) in single-dose regimens and 340 mg/m(2) in multiple-dose regimens. In radioprotection, doses are generally 200 - 350 mg/m(2). For all these characteristics, amifostine has been recently approved and suggested in ASCO clinical practice guidelines as a radioprotector for head and neck cancer treatment and supportive agent during cisplatin-based chemotherapy, in lymphomas and solid tumours. Moreover, its spectrum of possible applications is enlarging. As data have been provided indicating that amifostine stimulates haematopoiesis, it has been employed with intriguing results in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS).
</abstract>

</text>
