<title>
Chemoprotection in anticancer therapy: the emerging role of amifostine (WR-2721).
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Amifostine (WR-2721, Ethyol), S-2[3-aminopropylamino]-ethyl-phosphorothioic acid, was selected as a clinically usable radioprotector from more than 4,400 compounds in the 1950s. A considerable amount of preclinical work suggested that amifostine, or its activated thiol WR-1065, protected normal cells effectively against the adverse effects of irradiation and several anticancer drugs without exhibiting tumor protection. In non-randomized and randomized trials in malignant melanoma, colorectal cancer, head and neck cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and epithelial ovarian carcinoma, amifostine significantly reduced the hematological and non-hematological toxicity of DNA-damaging agents such as alkylators, platinum compounds, or mitomycin C. In more recent studies, the drug also protected patients from side effects produced by taxanes or topoisomerase I inhibitors and is thus likely to allow higher cytostatic doses to be administered. Currently, there is no evidence that amifostine compromises the antineoplastic effect of the drugs studied. Otherwise, W/R-2721 may even improve the therapeutic efficacy of agents like cisplatin, carboplatin, or paclitaxel. Moreover, amifostine appears to produce growth-factor like properties resulting in growth-promoting effects on primitive blood progenitor cells ex vivo. Amifostine offers a rational approach to protect patients against chemotherapy-specific and often dose-limiting effects and is thus likely to improve therapeutic outcome significantly. Future studies should be focused on both new indications like childhood cancer, myelodysplastic syndromes, dose-intensified or high- dose chemotherapy, and multimodality approaches and optimization of amifostine dosage in order to reduce dose-limiting side effects. Then, the drug may play a major role in more specific and individualized oncologic strategies.
</abstract>

</text>
