<title>
[The various forms of left ventricular hypertrophy: diagnostic value of echocardiography].
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Left ventricular hypertrophy is a non-specific physiological or maladaptive cardiac response to a large array of stimuli mediated by exercise and numerous cardiac and systemic diseases. The precise characterization and quantification of left ventricular hypertrophy may allow a more timely diagnosis of the underlying condition. The clinical reference standard to assess left ventricular hypertrophy is echocardiography, but a comprehensive description of how to approach this frequent finding in clinical practice is lacking. The current review systematically describes the typical echocardiographic patterns of important types of cardiac hypertrophy using both established and advanced imaging modalities. In hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy a markedly reduced regional systolic function is found in the prominent thickened septum, whereas in essential arterial hypertension a typical concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with a less prominent basal septal bulge is present. The echocardiographic characteristics of cardiac amyloidosis are ventricular hypertrophy with sparkling granular myocardial texture and a small epicardial effusion. In addition, the strain rate curve for longitudinal function shows a typically reduced function which reaches maximum already in early systole. The typical feature of Friedreich cardiomyopathy is concentric left ventricular hypertrophy and sparkling granular texture with preserved regional systolic function. In Fabry cardiomyopathy a prominent papillary muscle is presented and a typical strain rate curve can be extracted from the basal lateral wall, indicating replacement fibrosis. Prominent hypertrabecularisation (ratio of non-compacted to compacted myocardium >2) in the apical and mid left ventricular segments is typical for non-compaction cardiomyopathy. Knowledge of these typical echocardiographic features enables the cardiologist to distinguish between the different hypertrophic entities, thus paving the way to early diagnosis.
</abstract>

</text>
