<title>
p16Ink4a suppression of lung adenocarcinoma by Bmi-1 in the presence of p38 activation.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
PURPOSE: Because evasion of tumor suppression is a critical step in cancer development, cancer cells have developed a variety of mechanisms to circumvent the influence of tumor suppressive pathways. Thus, genes that negatively regulate tumor suppressors could be considered novel types of oncogenes such as Bmi-1 repressing p16Ink4a and inhibiting p53 and were found to be frequently up-regulated in a variety of cancers. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which reportedly plays a crucial role as a tumor suppressor, is activated in number of lung adenocarcinomas, which is seemingly at odds with its role as a tumor suppressor. METHODS: We examined 10 lung adenocarcinomas and corresponding normal tissues and determined the expression levels of a variety of tumor suppressor proteins through real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry and measured p38 MAPK activity by immunoblotting or immunohistochemistry analysis. In the in vitro cellular model, p38 activation by H-Ras and consequent senescence induction was achieved through retro-viral gene transduction. Similarly, the suppression of p16Ink4a by Bmi-1 after the introduction of H-Ras was achieved through transient transfection with cationic liposome. RESULTS: We detected several lung adenocarcinomas that were positive for activated p38 MAPK but evidenced reduced levels of p16Ink4a expression. The suppression of p16Ink4a occurred in parallel with an increase in Bmi-1 and/or p16Ink4a promoter hypermethylation. Consistent with these observations, the H-Ras-stimulated induction of p16Ink4a was suppressed significantly through the coexpression of Bmi-1 in vitro. DISCUSSION: These results demonstrate that the suppression of p16Ink4a by either the induction of Bmi-1 or the hypermethylation of p16Ink4 may be an important step in avoiding tumor surveillance by p38 MAPK during the development of lung cancer.
</abstract>

</text>
