<title>
Thyroid hormone-dependent gene expression in differentiated embryonic stem cells and embryonal carcinoma cells: identification of novel thyroid hormone target genes by deoxyribonucleic acid microarray analysis.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
T3 is required for normal early development, but relatively few T3-responsive target genes have been identified. In general, in vitro stem cell differentiation techniques stimulate a wide range of developmental programs, including thyroid hormone receptor (TR) pathways. We developed several in vitro stem cell models to more specifically identify TR-mediated gene expression in early development. We found that embryonic carcinoma (EC) cells have reduced T3 nuclear binding capacity and only modestly express the known T3 target genes, neurogranin (RC3) and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV), in response to T3. Full T3 induction in transient transfection of EC cells was restored with cotransfection of a TR expression vector. We, therefore, performed gene expression profiles in wild-type embryonic stem (ES) cells compared with expression in cells with deficient (EC) or mutant TR (TRalpha P398H mutant ES cells), to identify T3 target genes. T3 stimulation of wild-type ES cells altered mRNA expression of 610 known genes (26% of those studied), although only approximately 60 genes (1%) met criteria for direct T3 stimulation based on the magnitude of induction and requirement for the presence of TR. We selected five candidate T3 target genes, neurexophilin 2, spermatid perinuclear RNA-binding protein (SPNR), kallikrein-binding protein (KBP), prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), and synaptotagmin II, for more detailed study. T3 responsiveness of these genes was evaluated in both in vitro endogenous gene expression and in vivo mouse model systems. These genes identified in a novel stem cell system, including those induced and repressed in response to T3, may mediate thyroid hormone actions in early development.
</abstract>

</text>
