<title>
Telomerase inhibition with a novel G-quadruplex-interactive agent, telomestatin: in vitro and in vivo studies in acute leukemia.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
The telomerase complex is responsible for telomere maintenance and represents a promising neoplasia therapeutic target. Recently, we have demonstrated that treatment with a G-quadruplex-interactive agent, telomestatin reproducibly inhibited telomerase activity in the BCR-ABL-positive leukemic cell lines. In the present study, we investigated the mechanisms of apoptosis induced by telomerase inhibition in acute leukemia. We have found the activation of caspase-3 and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase in telomestatin-treated U937 cells (PD20) and dominant-negative DN-hTERT-expressing U937 cells (PD25). Activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and MKK3/6 was also found in telomestatin-treated U937 cells (PD20) and dominant-negative DN-hTERT-expressing U937 cells (PD25); however, activation of JNK and ASK1 was not detected in these cells. To examine the effect of p38 MAP kinase inhibition on growth properties and apoptosis in telomerase-inhibited cells, we cultured DN-hTERT-expressing U937 cells with or without SB203580. Dominant-negative-hTERT-expressing U937 cells stopped proliferation on PD25; however, a significant increase in growth rate was observed in the presence of SB203580. Treatment of SB203580 also reduced the induction of apoptosis in DN-hTERT-expressing U937 cells (PD25). These results suggest that p38 MAP kinase has a critical role for the induction of apoptosis in telomerase-inhibited leukemia cells. Further, we evaluated the effect of telomestatin on the growth of U937 cells in xenograft mouse model. Systemic intraperitoneal administration of telomestatin in U937 xenografts decreased tumor telomerase levels and reduced tumor volumes. Tumor tissue from telomestatin-treated animals exhibited marked apoptosis. None of the mice treated with telomestatin displayed any signs of toxicity. Taken together, these results lay the foundations for a program of drug development to achieve the dual aims of efficacy and selectivity in vivo.
</abstract>

</text>
