<title>
Krabbe Disease
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Krabbe disease is characterized by infantile-onset progressive neurologic deterioration and death before age two years (85%-90% of individuals) or by onset between age one year and the fifth decade with slower disease progression (10%-15%). Children with the infantile form appear to be normal for the first few months of life but show extreme irritability, spasticity, and developmental delay before age six months; psychomotor regression progresses to a decerebrate state with no voluntary movement. The onset and progression in the late-onset forms can be quite variable. Individuals can be clinically normal until weakness, vision loss, and intellectual regression become evident. The onset of symptoms and clinical course can be variable even among siblings. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: In almost all individuals with Krabbe disease, galactocerebrosidase (GALC) enzyme activity is deficient (0%-5% of normal activity) in leukocytes isolated from whole heparinized blood or in cultured skin fibroblasts. Testing is most reliable when conducted in a laboratory with demonstrated experience in this assay. Carrier testing by measurement of GALC enzyme activity in leukocytes or in cultured skin fibroblasts is not reliable because of the wide range of enzymatic activities observed in carriers and non-carriers. GALC is the gene most commonly known to be associated with Krabbe disease. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Only supportive care to control irritability and spasticity in children with infantile-onset Krabbe disease is available in the later stages (II and III). Prevention of primary manifestations: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in presymptomatic infants and older individuals with mild symptoms may improve and preserve cognitive function, but peripheral nervous system function may deteriorate. Significant clinical variability in late-onset forms makes evaluation of treatment effectiveness difficult. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Testing at-risk infants can reduce morbidity and mortality through early diagnosis and HSCT using umbilical cord blood. GENETIC COUNSELING: Krabbe disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both parents are carriers, each child has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Each healthy sib of a proband has a 2/3 chance of being a carrier. For genetic counseling purposes, a carrier frequency of one in 150 may be used for the general population. Carrier detection by molecular genetic testing is possible if the disease-causing mutations have been identified in the family. Prenatal diagnosis is possible either by measurement of GALC enzyme activity or by molecular genetic testing if both disease-causing alleles in an affected family member are known.
</abstract>

</text>
