<title>
Antioxidant micronutrients and cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes: a systematic review.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
BACKGROUND: Inverse associations between micronutrient intake and cardiovascular outcomes have been previously shown, but did not focus on diabetic patients. OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the role of micronutrients in the development/presence of cardiovascular outcomes in patients with diabetes. METHODS: We searched Medline, Embase, and Scopus (January/1949-March/2012) for observational studies that evaluated micronutrients and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with diabetes, and then selected and extracted the data (two independent reviewers). RESULTS: From the 15 658 studies identified, five were included, comprising three case-control and two cohorts, with a follow-up of 7-15 years. A meta-analysis was not performed due to the different antioxidant micronutrients (types and measurement methods) and outcomes evaluated. The micronutrients assessed were vitamin C intake in diet and/or supplementation, chromium and selenium in toenail samples, and α-tocopherol and zinc in serum levels. Intake of >300 mg of vitamin C through supplementation was associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, coronary artery disease (CAD), and stroke (RR 1.69-2.37). High levels of α-tocopherol in serum were associated with 30% lower CAD risk in another study (HR 0.71; 95%CI 0.53-0.94). Among minerals (zinc, selenium, and chromium), an inverse association between zinc and CAD was observed; levels lower than 14.1 µmol/L were associated with an increased risk for CAD (RR 1.70; 95%CI 1.21-2.38). CONCLUSION: The information available on this issue is scarce. Further prospective studies are needed to elucidate the role of these nutrients in the cardiovascular risk of patients with diabetes.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
iological research supports a key role for oxidative stress in atherogenesis; free
radical-mediated damage induces oxidative changes in low-density cholesterol particles
that initiate and promote atherosclerotic changes. his process could be reversed or
prevented by the use of antioxidants1.
bservational studies have shown inverse associations between antioxidant intake and
cardiovascular events2, but randomized
clinical trials have not shown any benefit of antioxidants in cardiovascular
events3. owever, these studies
did not focus on patients with diabetes mellitus (), a population with high
cardiovascular disease risk.
oronary and cerebrovascular diseases, which are caused primarily by atherosclerosis,
are the major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with 4, and occur more frequently and more
severely in these patients5.
yperglycemia in  is characterized by a high oxidative stress state6, which is closely related to the genesis
of chronic complications of diabetes, including cardiovascular diseases7. articular attention has been given to
the applicability of antioxidant therapy (endogenous enzymes and dietary substances) in
the prevention and management of diabetic complications, especially atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease8.
ifestyle changes and a healthy diet are included in the prevention and/or treatment of
atherosclerosis in patients with or without . igh intake of fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, and oil seeds and low intake of sodium are usually recommended9. pidemiological studies have shown that
certain foods with antioxidant properties are associated with a reduction in
inflammatory markers and low-density cholesterol oxidation8, and consequently, improved endothelial
function10.
he aim of this study was to systematically review the role of vitamins (vitamins , ,
and ) and minerals (zinc, selenium, chromium, manganese, and copper) with antioxidants
properties in the presence or development of clinical cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with .Introduction
Biological research supports a key role for oxidative stress in atherogenesis; free
radical-mediated damage induces oxidative changes in low-density cholesterol particles
that initiate and promote atherosclerotic changes. This process could be reversed or
prevented by the use of antioxidants1.
Observational studies have shown inverse associations between antioxidant intake and
cardiovascular events2, but randomized
clinical trials have not shown any benefit of antioxidants in cardiovascular
events3. However, these studies
did not focus on patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), a population with high
cardiovascular disease risk.
Coronary and cerebrovascular diseases, which are caused primarily by atherosclerosis,
are the major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with DM4, and occur more frequently and more
severely in these patients5.
Hyperglycemia in DM is characterized by a high oxidative stress state6, which is closely related to the genesis
of chronic complications of diabetes, including cardiovascular diseases7. Particular attention has been given to
the applicability of antioxidant therapy (endogenous enzymes and dietary substances) in
the prevention and management of diabetic complications, especially atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease8.
Lifestyle changes and a healthy diet are included in the prevention and/or treatment of
atherosclerosis in patients with or without DM. High intake of fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, and oil seeds and low intake of sodium are usually recommended9. Epidemiological studies have shown that
certain foods with antioxidant properties are associated with a reduction in
inflammatory markers and low-density cholesterol oxidation8, and consequently, improved endothelial
function10.
The aim of this study was to systematically review the role of vitamins (vitamins A, C,
and E) and minerals (zinc, selenium, chromium, manganese, and copper) with antioxidants
properties in the presence or development of clinical cardiovascular outcomes in
patients with DM.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Methods
iterature search. The search was performed to select observational studies that evaluated the role of
antioxidant micronutrient intake (vitamins and minerals) in the presence or
development of cardiovascular events in patients with DM. The databases used in the
search were Medline from Pubmed, Embase, and
Scopus for the period from January 1949 to March 2012. The search
strategy included terms referring to antioxidant micronutrients:
"micronutrients," "antioxidant micronutrient," "trace elements,"
"biometals," "antioxidants," "vitamins," "antioxidant vitamins," "vitamin C,"
'ascorbic acid," 'vitamin E," "tocopherols," "alfa-tocopherol,"
"Ξ²-carotene," "vitamin A," "pro-vitamin A," "minerals,"
"antioxidant minerals," "diet," "diet therapy," "zinc," "copper," "manganese,"
"chromium," "selenium", to patients (type 1 or type 2 DM):
"Diabetes Mellitus, Type 1," "Diabetes Mellitus, Insulin-Dependent,"
"Diabetes Mellitus, Juvenile-Onset," "Diabetes Mellitus, Sudden-Onset," "Diabetes
Mellitus, Type I," "IDDM," "Diabetes Mellitus, Brittle," "Diabetes Mellitus,
Ketosis-Prone," Autoimmune Diabetes, "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2," "Diabetes
Mellitus, Ketosis-Resistant," "Diabetes Mellitus, Non-Insulin-Dependent,"
"Diabetes Mellitus, Slow-Onset," Stable Diabetes Mellitus, "Diabetes Mellitus,
Type II," NIDDM, "Diabetes Mellitus, Adult-Onset," "Diabetes Mellitus, Noninsulin
Dependent," "Maturity-Onset Diabetes Mellitus," and type of study
(observational), using a previously validated list of terms available at: http://www.sign.ac.uk/methodology/filters.html#obs.The search strategy described above was used to identify studies on
Pubmed. Similar terms were searched for in other databases. There
was no restriction of the language used in the publications. The article references
included in this review were consulted to identify other potentially eligible
studies.Inclusion and exclusion criteriaWe included observational studies (case-control studies and cohorts irrespective of
their prospective or retrospective nature) that evaluated the role of antioxidant
micronutrient intake (from diet and/or supplements) in the presence or development of
major cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction or revascularization,
stroke, sudden death, and death from cardiovascular causes in patients with type 1 or
type 2 DM.In selecting the studies, the antioxidant micronutrients looked at were vitamin A
(beta-carotene), vitamin C (ascorbic acid), vitamin E (tocopherol), zinc, selenium,
chromium, manganese, and copper. The outcomes considered were major cardiovascular
events (cardiovascular death, stroke, myocardial infarction, and myocardial
revascularization) and their individual components (fatal and non-fatal myocardial
infarction, fatal and non-fatal stroke, sudden death or myocardial
revascularization).Study selection and data extractionTwo reviewers (R.A.S. and F.M.S.) independently reviewed the titles and abstracts of
each article identified in the literature search. In this first stage all articles
that clearly did not meet the inclusion criteria were rejected. The selected articles
were analyzed by reading the full text, and the eligible articles were then
identified. Disagreements between reviewers at this stage of article analysis were
resolved by discussion. The concordance, estimated by Kappa coefficient, was good
(Kappa = 0.79).Data extraction from each study included in this review was conducted independently
by two reviewers (R.A.S. and F.M.S.) using a standardized instrument. The data
extracted were publication identification, study design, sample size, follow-up
duration (in cohort studies), and participants' general characteristics (type of DM,
age, gender, body mass index, diabetes treatment, hypertension, and smoking). The
data on diet characteristics and micronutrient antioxidants evaluated (quantity,
measurement unit, and assessment method) were also extracted. The data extracted
concerning cardiovascular outcomes were event type, case numbers, and the estimated
risk as presented in the manuscript [relative risk (RR), odds ratio (OR), or
hazard ratio (HR)]. We extracted the risk estimate data that considered the
largest number of covariates in the analyses.Quality assessment of studiesThe methodological quality of each study included in this review was assessed
independently by two reviewers (R.A.S. and F.M.S.) from a questionnaire developed by
the authors. The questionnaire was based on four instruments for quality assessment
of observational studies designed by the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
and Critical Appraisal Skills Programme, as proposed in the Cochrane
Handbook11. The questionnaire
included issues related to the study aim (clarity and specificity), the inclusion and
exclusion criteria used to select the participants, sample size of groups, number of
patients lost from each group, assessment form of exposure status to the factor
studied, and outcomes (if standardized assessment was made by blinded investigators
as to the participant exposure status).
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Results
iterature search. From the 15 658 articles identified, 2865 were excluded because they were duplicated
among the databases searched. After analysis of titles and abstracts, 12 766 articles
were excluded because they did not meet the inclusion criteria and 27 articles were
selected for reading the full text. After evaluating the full texts, 22 articles were
excluded because of the following criteria: five studies were not observational, one
study involved patients with pre-diabetes and without diabetes, three studies did not
assess antioxidant micronutrient effect, seven studies did not evaluate
cardiovascular outcomes, and six studies included DM as a covariate in estimating
cardiovascular risk and sub-analyses did not include only patients with DM. New
articles were not identified from the reference lists of studies consulted.
Therefore, five studies were included in this review12-16. The study
selection flow diagram is shown in Figure
1.Figure 1The study selection flow diagram.General characteristics of the studiesThe main characteristics of the five studies included are described in Table 1. Three of them presented a case-control
design12,14,15 and two
were cohort studies13,16 with a follow-up ranging from
716 to 15 years13. One study was conducted in patients
with type 1 DM15, one study
included patients with type 2 DM16,
and in one manuscript the authors reported that the majority of the participants had
type 2 DM13. The other two studies
did not specify the type of diabetes12,14. Sample size ranged
from 12115 to 1923
participants13. The age of
the patients ranged from 34 to 75 years. Two studies included both men and
women15,16, two studies were performed only in men12,14, and one study was conducted only in women13. Two studies described the treatment
of DM; in one of them most of the participants were using oral antidiabetic
agents16; whereas in the
other study, approximately 70% of patients were using insulin and/or oral
antidiabetic agents13. Only two
studies reported the number of hypertensive participants, current smokers, and the
waist-to-hip ratio values13,15.Table 1Main features of studiesAuthor, yearDesign (follow-up)nDMDM durationAge (years)GenderBMI (kg/m2)Micronutrient Rajpathak et al12(2004) case-control 886 not reported not reported 40-75 100% men not reported chromium Lee et al13
(2004) cohort (15 years) 1923 not reported 10.3 years 62.2 100% women 30.1 vitamin C Rajpathak et al14
(2005) case-control 886 not reported not reported 40-75 100% men not reported selenium Costacou et al15
(2006) case-control i2i type 1 26.7 years 34.6 47.9% women 24.2 a-tocopherol Soinio et al16
(2007) cohort (7 years) i059 type 2 not reported 45-64 45.1% women 27.9 zincDM: Diabetes Mellitus; BMI: body mass index.Different antioxidant micronutrients were evaluated in the studies and different
methods were used to measure them. Vitamin C provided in dietary intake and/or
supplementation was assessed by food frequency questionnaire13, chromium and selenium were
quantified in samples12,14, and Ξ±-tocopherol and zinc
were measured in serum15,16. The usual diet composition was not
described in any study, only a partial dietary description of saturated fatty acids,
vitamin E, and beta-carotene was reported in one study13.Cardiovascular outcomes were differently evaluated among the studies: two studies
evaluated the presence of cardiovascular disease12,14, two reported the
presence of coronary artery disease15,16 and one other study
reported mortality by cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, and
stroke13. Because of these
differences we could not perform a meta-analysis of the data extracted. Therefore,
the main results of each study included in this review are shown in Table 2 and discussed.Table 2Main results of the studies Included In the reviewAuthor (year)Micronutrient (measure unit)Statistical analysis criteriaOutcome (number of cases /total number)RR/OR/HR (CI 95%)Variables considered for adjustment in multivariate
analysis Rajpathak et al. (2004)12 toenail chrome (ΞΌg/g) upper quartile (>2.08) vs. other quartiles CVD (198/886) OR = 0.68 (0.42-1.10) Age, BMI, alcohol, smoking, family history of AMI, physical activity,
hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, dietary fats, fiber, glycemic load,
folate and selenium levels, and mercury in toenail. Lee et al. (2004)13vitamin C (mg/day) diet and supplementation upper quintile (>667) vs. other quintiles CVD (281/1923) RR = 1.84 (1.12-3.01)Age, energy, WHR, BMI, physical activity, smoking,
alcoholism, education, marital status, HRT, treatment and duration of DM,
dietary fats, vitamin E, Ξ²-carotene and folate. CAD (175/1923) RR = 1.91 (1.05-3.48) Stroke (57/1923) RR = 2.57 (0.86-7.66) only diet upper quintile (>251) vs. other quintiles CVD (281/1923) RR = 1.11 (0.66-1.87) Age, energy, WHR, BMI, physical activity, smoking,
alcoholism, education, marital status, HRT, treatment and DM duration,
dietary fats, vitamin E, p-carotene, folate,and vitamin C
supplements. CAD (175/1923) RR = 1.08 (0.57-2.06) Stroke (57/1923) RR = 1.89 (0.60-6.03) only supplementation upper quartile (>300) vs. other quartiles CVD (281/1923) RR = 1.69 (1.09-2.44) Age, energy, WHR, BMI, physical activity, smoking,
alcoholism, education, marital status, HRT treatment and DM duration, and
vitamin C. CAD (175/1923) RR = 2.07 (1.27-3.38) Stroke (57/1923) RR = 2.37 (1.01-5.57) Rajpathak et al. (2005)14 toenail selenium (ΞΌg/g) upper quartile (>1.20) vs. other quartiles CVD (198/886) OR = 1.47 (0.92-2.35) Age, BMI, alcohol, smoking, family history of MI, physical activity,
hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, dietary fats, fiber, glycemic load,
folate and chromium, and mercury levels in toenail. Costacou et al. (2006)15 serum Ξ±-tocopherol (ΞΌg/ml) high levels (>10.45) vs. low levels CAD (54/121) HR = 0.71 (0.53-0.94) Adjustment model is not specified. Soinio et al. (2007)16 serum zinc (ΞΌmol/L)lower quartile (<14.1) vs. other quartiles Fatal CAD (156/1059) RR = 1.70 (1.21-2.38) Age, sex, DM duration, total cholesterol, HDL-c,
triglycerides, HbAlc, GFR, hypertension, smoking, BMI, residence place,
and DM treatment. Fatal CAD or non-fatal AMI (254/1059) RR = 1.37 (1.03-1.82)CAD: coronary artery disease; CVD: cardiovascular disease; DM: Diabetes
Mellitus; AMI: acute myocardial infarction; OR: odds ratio; HR: hazard
ratio; RR: relative risk; CI: confidence interval; WHR: waist-to-hip ratio;
BMI: body mass index; HRT hormone replacement therapy; HDL-c:
HDL-cholesterol; HbA1c: glycated hemoglobin; GFR: glomerular filtration
rate.Main findings of the studiesAntioxidant vitamins and cardiovascular outcomesThe role of antioxidant vitamins in cardiovascular disease development was
evaluated in two studies13,15.The relationship between vitamin C intake (assessed by a food frequency
questionnaire validated in a subsample of the study population) and cardiovascular
outcomes in postmenopausal women with DM was evaluated in a prospective cohort
study followed for 15 years13.
Cardiovascular outcomes (cardiovascular disease mortality, coronary heart disease
and stroke) were defined based on the International Classification of Diseases:
the codes potentially related to the diagnoses of interest were selected according
to the description in the records of local deaths (Iowa, USA). Vitamin C intake of
more than 667 mg/day (diet and/or by supplementation) approximately doubled the
risk of mortality from cardiovascular disease and coronary artery disease in
patients with diabetes. When dietary and supplemental vitamin C were analyzed
separately, only supplemental vitamin C showed a positive association with
mortality endpoints: the use of at least 300 mg/day of vitamin C supplements was
associated with higher risk of cardiovascular disease mortality (RR 1.69; 95%CI
1.09-2.44), coronary artery disease (RR 2.07; 95%CI 1.27-3.38) and stroke (RR 2.3;
95%CI 1.01-5.57) than using smaller quantities of supplementation. The effect of Ξ±-tocopherol, Ξ³-tocopherol, and retinol on the
incidence of coronary artery disease in patients with type 1 DM was evaluated in a
study of 54 cases and 67 controls derived from a cohort study conducted in
Pittsburgh, USA15. Cases were
defined by the participants who first developed coronary artery disease, as
determined by one of the following criteria: physician-diagnosed angina,
myocardial infarction confirmed by Q-waves on electrocardiogram, hospital records
(Minnesota code 1.1 or 1.2), angiographic stenosis β‰¥50%, coronary artery
bypass surgery, angioplasty, or ischemic electrocardiographic changes during the
follow-up period. Serum levels of Ξ±-tocopherol β‰¥10.45 Βµg/ml
were inversely associated with coronary artery disease (HR 0.71; 95%CI 0.53-0.94).
However, when multivitamin supplement users were compared to nonusers, the
protective effect of this micronutrient was observed only among supplement users
(HR 0.22; 95%CI 0.10-0.49). It is noteworthy that the authors did not specifically
report the type of supplement used by the study participants.Antioxidant minerals and cardiovascular riskThe possible association between zinc, chromium and selenium and presence or
development of cardiovascular events in patients with DM were evaluated by three
studies12,14,16.A cohort study with 7 years of follow-up investigated serum zinc levels as a
predictor of coronary artery disease in 1050 patients with type 2 DM from
Finland16. The outcomes
evaluated were mortality from coronary artery disease based on medical records and
death certificates, and myocardial infarction incidence according to the World
Health Organization criteria (chest pain, enzyme changes and electrocardiogram).
Patients with β‰¤ 14.1 Βµmol/L of serum zinc at baseline were at higher
risk of death from coronary artery disease (RR 1.7; 95%CI 1.21-2.38) and fatal and
non-fatal myocardial infarction (RR 1.37; 95%CI 1.03-1.82) than patients with
serum levels β‰¥14.1 Βµmol/L.In a case-control study (derived from the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study), toenail levels of chromium12 or selenium14 were determined in 198 male patients with DM and prior
cardiovascular disease, as well as 688 male patients with DM and without
cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular disease was considered present when
subjects presented fatal or non-fatal myocardial infarction as defined by the
World Health Organization criteria, coronary artery bypass grafting, angioplasty
or stroke. In a multivariate analysis adjusted for the other potential confounding
factors, there was no association between chromium12 or selenium14 levels and cardiovascular outcomes.Quality evaluationQuality evaluation is shown in Table 3.
None of the studies included meets all the criteria previously established to
evaluate methodological quality. However, all five studies were for the purpose of
answering a clear and focused question and four of them assessed the exposure
status and outcomes in a standardized and valid method. The information regarding
the outcomes was collected from population-based registries in the two cohort
studies selected13,16. In the three case-control
studies12,14,15,
outcomes were measured in a valid and standardized way. Potential confounding
factors were considered in analysis of data from four studies12-14,16. Only one study
showed no clear results, because the authors did not describe which covariates
were used for multivariate regression adjustment15. Among the three case-control studies, none of
them described whether the follow-up losses were similar between the
groups12,14,15. In the
two cohort studies13,16, follow up duration was considered
appropriate and the selection of participants was controlled for potential
confounding factors.Table 3Methodological quality of studies included in this reviewΒ Cohort studiesΒ Case-control studiesΒ Lee et al. (2004)13Soinio et al. (2007)16Rajpathak et al. (2004)12Rajpathak et al. (2005)14Costacou et al. (2006)15Items related to all observational
studies Issue clear, focused, and appropriate Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Exposure status assessed by valid and standardized way Yes Yes Yes Yes No Outcomes assessed by valid and standardized way Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Outcomes evaluated by investigators blinded to the exposure Not described Not described Yes Yes Not described Potential confounding factors considered in the analysis of
data Yes Yes Yes Yes Not described Results clearly presented and discussed Yes Yes Yes Yes NoItems related to cohort studies Sufficient follow-up duration Yes Yes Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Selection of participants controlled for potential confounders Yes Yes Not applicable Not applicable Not applicableItems related to case-control studies Sample size similar between cases and controls Not applicable Not applicable No No Yes Data collected similarly for cases and controls Not applicable Not applicable Yes Yes Yes Exclusion criteria applied similarly for cases and controls Not applicable Not applicable Not described Not described Not described Clearly defined cases Not applicable Not applicable Yes Yes Yes Controls clearly defined Not applicable Not applicable Yes Yes Yes Follow-up losses similar between cases and controls Not applicable Not applicable Not described Not described Not described
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Discussion
he purpose of this systematic review was to evaluate the role of antioxidant
micronutrients in the presence or development of cardiovascular events in patients with
. owever, the high clinical heterogeneity among the studies obtained hindered the
performance of a meta-analysis. oreover, information on this issue is scarce and of low
quality. itamin , vitamin  (±-tocopherol), zinc, selenium, and chromium were
micronutrients with antioxidant properties evaluated by the case-control and cohort
studies included in this review. he outcomes analyzed were myocardial infarction,
stroke, myocardial revascularization, sudden death, and death from cardiovascular
causes.
he use of more than 300 mg/day of vitamin  by supplementation was associated with
increased cardiovascular risk13.
nterestingly, this is not what is reported for subjects without diabetes2,17.  systematic review of 15 cohort studies with 374,488 subjects without
 showed an inverse association between higher intake of vitamin  (diet and
supplement) and risk of coronary artery disease ( 0.84; 95% 0.73-0.95)2, but the results were not confirmed with
the use of supplemental vitamin  only in the same study2. n clinical trials with long follow-up periods analyzed
in other reviews, vitamin  supplement use had no significant effect on the risk of
myocardial infarction and stroke in subjects without diabetes17. he inconsistency of these findings may be partially
explained by the presence of diabetes and the recommended daily intake of the vitamin.
itamin  can act as a pro-oxidant interacting with free iron18 and among patients with  an iron metabolism disorder
seems to occur, with an increase in free iron stores19. lternatively, vitamin  could have promoted protein
glycation20 and stimulated lipid
peroxidation21, with a possibly
deleterious effect on the cardiovascular system as higher doses were administered. he
daily vitamin  supplementation amount used was higher than the recommended daily intake
for adults (90 mg/day for men and 75 mg/day for women), but lower than the maximum
tolerable level (2000 mg/day)22. 
educed serum levels of ±-tocopherol were inversely associated with the
incidence of coronary artery disease15, according to prospective observational studies in individuals without
 and/or without previous cardiovascular disease23,24. he
±-tocopherol form of vitamin  is the most biologically active and could be
considered a good biomarker of the consumption of this vitamin25. owever, the beneficial effect observed in the study
included in the current review occurred among users of antioxidant supplements, without
specifying the supplement type and quantity15. oreover, increased mortality from all causes3 in subjects without  was demonstrated
with 10-5000 /day of vitamin  supplementation in randomized clinical trials. 
possible explanation of the adverse effects described is that vitamin  can inhibit
platelet function26.
igh serum zinc was shown to be protective against the development of cardiovascular
disease16, a result that is in
accordance with other studies in patients without 27,28. atients with type 2
 presented lower values of serum zinc (9.23 µmol/ vs. 12.46
µmol/, p < 0.001) compared with patients without , suggesting a lower
antioxidant capacity in diabetes29.
ossibly, the importance of maintaining high serum zinc values is due to their role in
an endogenous antioxidant system30
and/or because zinc plays a clear role in the synthesis, storage and secretion of
insulin31.
hromium12 and selenium14, which were measured in the toenail,
were not associated with cardiovascular outcomes in patients with  in the studies
included in this review. his result is different from what was observed in subjects
without  in a case-control study performed in eight uropean countries and srael
( study)32. n the 
study, chromium levels in nails was inversely associated with the occurrence of
myocardial infarction ( 0.59; 95% 0.37-0.95)32. oreover, chromium33 and zinc31 are
beneficial in regulating insulin action and energy metabolism. etter glycemic control
could be reflected in lower cardiovascular outcomes34. n a recent systematic review with meta-analysis, chromium
supplementation (1.28 to 1000 mcg/day) decreased the glycated hemoglobin values in 381
patients with  by 0.6% (95% -0.9 to -0.2)35. owever, cardiovascular outcomes were not evaluated in that
study.
he study which evaluated selenium included in the current review was not in accordance
with a recent meta-analysis of 25 observational studies36 that demonstrated a reduction of 24% (95% 7-38) in the
risk of coronary artery disease with an increase of 50% in selenium levels (assessed by
different methods). elenium is another essential mineral involved in antioxidant
defense, since it is part of glutathione peroxidase, a selenoprotein.
n this context, low serum selenium has been linked to increased risk of cardiovascular
disease in subjects without 37. he
effects of selenium supplementation (200 µg/day) in the prevention of
cardiovascular events were not confirmed in a randomized clinical trial36 or in a prospective study having a
follow-up of 7.6 years38, probably due
to its narrow therapeutic range. elenium deficiency in humans appears to be just one
factor in a complex set of nutritional variables that may predispose or protect against
cardiovascular disease37. ne of the
limitations common to studies with selenium and chromium included in this review
involves the measurement method adopted. lthough the levels of these minerals in the
toenail may reflect the long-term intake of the mineral25, samples contamination could be a source of
error12,14.
ur systematic review has several limitations: 1. the low quality of the original
studies; 2. no study included meets all items previously established to evaluate
methodological quality and potential confounding factors were considered in the analysis
of data just from four studies12-14,16; 3. no sensibility analysis was carried out due to clinical
heterogeneity of studies included; 4. the case-control studies did not allow us to
establish a cause-consequence between micronutrients intake and cardiovascular outcomes.
lso, the results for supplementation of vitamin  derived from a single cohort study
and need to be considered with caution.n conclusion and according to available
evidence, information about antioxidant micronutrient intake and cardiovascular risk in
individuals with  is too scarce to determine which micronutrient antioxidants might be
related to cardiovascular outcomes in the  population. oreover, the antioxidant
property of micronutrients appears to be only one factor in a complex set of nutritional
variables that may predispose or protect against cardiovascular disease. urther studies
should be performed to explore the relationship between antioxidant micronutrient intake
and the development of cardiovascular disease in patients with , preferably randomized
controlled trials. he description of the results of this review will aid researchers
interested in investigating the topic to develop their hypotheses.Discussion
The purpose of this systematic review was to evaluate the role of antioxidant
micronutrients in the presence or development of cardiovascular events in patients with
DM. However, the high clinical heterogeneity among the studies obtained hindered the
performance of a meta-analysis. Moreover, information on this issue is scarce and of low
quality. Vitamin C, vitamin E (Ξ±-tocopherol), zinc, selenium, and chromium were
micronutrients with antioxidant properties evaluated by the case-control and cohort
studies included in this review. The outcomes analyzed were myocardial infarction,
stroke, myocardial revascularization, sudden death, and death from cardiovascular
causes.
The use of more than 300 mg/day of vitamin C by supplementation was associated with
increased cardiovascular risk13.
Interestingly, this is not what is reported for subjects without diabetes2,17. A systematic review of 15 cohort studies with 374,488 subjects without
DM showed an inverse association between higher intake of vitamin C (diet and
supplement) and risk of coronary artery disease (RR 0.84; 95%CI 0.73-0.95)2, but the results were not confirmed with
the use of supplemental vitamin C only in the same study2. In clinical trials with long follow-up periods analyzed
in other reviews, vitamin C supplement use had no significant effect on the risk of
myocardial infarction and stroke in subjects without diabetes17. The inconsistency of these findings may be partially
explained by the presence of diabetes and the recommended daily intake of the vitamin.
Vitamin C can act as a pro-oxidant interacting with free iron18 and among patients with DM an iron metabolism disorder
seems to occur, with an increase in free iron stores19. Alternatively, vitamin C could have promoted protein
glycation20 and stimulated lipid
peroxidation21, with a possibly
deleterious effect on the cardiovascular system as higher doses were administered. The
daily vitamin C supplementation amount used was higher than the recommended daily intake
for adults (90 mg/day for men and 75 mg/day for women), but lower than the maximum
tolerable level (2000 mg/day)22. 
Reduced serum levels of Ξ±-tocopherol were inversely associated with the
incidence of coronary artery disease15, according to prospective observational studies in individuals without
DM and/or without previous cardiovascular disease23,24. The
Ξ±-tocopherol form of vitamin E is the most biologically active and could be
considered a good biomarker of the consumption of this vitamin25. However, the beneficial effect observed in the study
included in the current review occurred among users of antioxidant supplements, without
specifying the supplement type and quantity15. Moreover, increased mortality from all causes3 in subjects without DM was demonstrated
with 10-5000 IU/day of vitamin E supplementation in randomized clinical trials. A
possible explanation of the adverse effects described is that vitamin E can inhibit
platelet function26.
High serum zinc was shown to be protective against the development of cardiovascular
disease16, a result that is in
accordance with other studies in patients without DM27,28. Patients with type 2
DM presented lower values of serum zinc (9.23 Βµmol/L vs. 12.46
Βµmol/L, p < 0.001) compared with patients without DM, suggesting a lower
antioxidant capacity in diabetes29.
Possibly, the importance of maintaining high serum zinc values is due to their role in
an endogenous antioxidant system30
and/or because zinc plays a clear role in the synthesis, storage and secretion of
insulin31.
Chromium12 and selenium14, which were measured in the toenail,
were not associated with cardiovascular outcomes in patients with DM in the studies
included in this review. This result is different from what was observed in subjects
without DM in a case-control study performed in eight European countries and Israel
(EURAMIC study)32. In the EURAMIC
study, chromium levels in nails was inversely associated with the occurrence of
myocardial infarction (OR 0.59; 95%CI 0.37-0.95)32. Moreover, chromium33 and zinc31 are
beneficial in regulating insulin action and energy metabolism. Better glycemic control
could be reflected in lower cardiovascular outcomes34. In a recent systematic review with meta-analysis, chromium
supplementation (1.28 to 1000 mcg/day) decreased the glycated hemoglobin values in 381
patients with DM by 0.6% (95%CI -0.9 to -0.2)35. However, cardiovascular outcomes were not evaluated in that
study.
The study which evaluated selenium included in the current review was not in accordance
with a recent meta-analysis of 25 observational studies36 that demonstrated a reduction of 24% (95%CI 7-38) in the
risk of coronary artery disease with an increase of 50% in selenium levels (assessed by
different methods). Selenium is another essential mineral involved in antioxidant
defense, since it is part of glutathione peroxidase, a selenoprotein.
In this context, low serum selenium has been linked to increased risk of cardiovascular
disease in subjects without DM37. The
effects of selenium supplementation (200 Βµg/day) in the prevention of
cardiovascular events were not confirmed in a randomized clinical trial36 or in a prospective study having a
follow-up of 7.6 years38, probably due
to its narrow therapeutic range. Selenium deficiency in humans appears to be just one
factor in a complex set of nutritional variables that may predispose or protect against
cardiovascular disease37. One of the
limitations common to studies with selenium and chromium included in this review
involves the measurement method adopted. Although the levels of these minerals in the
toenail may reflect the long-term intake of the mineral25, samples contamination could be a source of
error12,14.
Our systematic review has several limitations: 1. the low quality of the original
studies; 2. no study included meets all items previously established to evaluate
methodological quality and potential confounding factors were considered in the analysis
of data just from four studies12-14,16; 3. no sensibility analysis was carried out due to clinical
heterogeneity of studies included; 4. the case-control studies did not allow us to
establish a cause-consequence between micronutrients intake and cardiovascular outcomes.
Also, the results for supplementation of vitamin C derived from a single cohort study
and need to be considered with caution.In conclusion and according to available
evidence, information about antioxidant micronutrient intake and cardiovascular risk in
individuals with DM is too scarce to determine which micronutrient antioxidants might be
related to cardiovascular outcomes in the DM population. Moreover, the antioxidant
property of micronutrients appears to be only one factor in a complex set of nutritional
variables that may predispose or protect against cardiovascular disease. Further studies
should be performed to explore the relationship between antioxidant micronutrient intake
and the development of cardiovascular disease in patients with DM, preferably randomized
controlled trials. The description of the results of this review will aid researchers
interested in investigating the topic to develop their hypotheses.
</sections.3>

</text>
