<title>
Evaluation and identification of reliable reference genes for pharmacogenomics, toxicogenomics, and small RNA expression analysis.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Pharmacogenomics, toxicogenomics, and small RNA expression analysis are three of the most active research topics in the biological, biomedical, pharmaceutical, and toxicological fields. All of these studies are based on gene expression analysis, which requires reference genes to reduce the variations derived from different amounts of starting materials and different efficiencies of RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis. Thus, accurate normalization to one or several constitutively expressed reference genes is a prerequisite to valid gene expression studies. Although selection of reliable reference genes has been conducted in previous studies in several animals and plants, no research has been focused on pharmacological targets, and very few studies have had a toxicological context. More interestingly, no studies have been performed to identify reference genes for small RNA analysis although small RNA, particularly microRNA (miRNA)-related research is currently one of the fastest-moving topics. In this study, using MCF-7 breast cancer cells as a model, we employed quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), one of the most reliable methods for gene expression analysis in many research fields, to evaluate and to determine the most reliable reference genes for pharmacogenomics and toxicogenomics studies as well as for small RNA expression analysis. We tested the transcriptional expression of five protein-coding genes as well as five non-coding genes in MCF-7 cells treated with five different pharmaceuticals or toxicants [paclitaxel (PTX), gossypol (GOS), methyl jasmonate (JAS), L-nicotine (NIC), and melamine (mela)] and analyzed the stability of the selected reference genes by four different methods: geNorm, NormFinder, BestKeeper, and the comparative ΔCt method. According to our analysis, a protein-coding gene, hTBCA and four non-coding genes, hRNU44, hRNU48, hU6, and hRNU47, appear to be the most reliable reference genes for the five chemical treatments. Similar results were also obtained in dose-response and time-course assays with gossypol (GOS) treatment. Our results demonstrated that traditionally used reference genes, such as 18s RNA, β-actin, and GAPDH, are not reliable reference genes for pharmacogenomics and toxicogenomics studies. In contrast, hTBCA and small RNAs are more stable during drug treatment, and they are better reference genes for pharmacogenomics and toxicogenomics studies. To widely use these genes as reference genes, these results should be corroborated by studies with other human cell lines and additional drugs classes and hormonal treatments.
</abstract>

</text>
