<title>
Erythropoietin improves the efficiency of endothelial progenitor cell therapy after myocardial infarction in mice: effects on transplanted cell survival and autologous endothelial progenitor cell mobilization.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
BACKGROUND: Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) participate in vascular repair and angiogenesis. Thus, EPC transplantation into ischemic myocardium might improve cardiac function; however, the vast majority of cells die within a short period. The present study was designed to investigate whether exogenous erythropoietin (EPO) delivery could improve the survival of transplanted EPCs and enhance the efficiency of EPC-based cell therapy. METHODS: Myocardial infarction was induced in wild-type mice by ligating the left anterior descending coronary artery. Enhanced green fluorescent protein-EPCs with or without EPO were transplanted into peri-infarct myocardium. Enhanced green fluorescent protein-EPCs were detected 7 and 28 d after surgery. The amount of circulating EPCs was analyzed 3 and 28 d after surgery. The stromal cell-derived factor-1α and vascular endothelial growth factor concentrations, microvessel density, apoptosis, fibrosis in the peri-infarct myocardium, and cardiac function were compared among the groups. RESULTS: More enhanced green fluorescent protein-EPCs were found in the hearts treated with EPC + EPO than in those treated with EPC alone. The circulating EPC level was markedly elevated after EPC + EPO treatment compared with EPC application alone. Stromal cell-derived factor-1α and vascular endothelial growth factor were increased accordingly, along with increased microvessel density, decreased apoptosis, and reduced fibrosis in the peri-infarct myocardium. Left ventricular fractional shortening was greater and the interventricular septum was thicker after EPC + EPO treatment compared with EPC treatment alone. CONCLUSIONS: EPO improved the efficiency of EPC therapy in mice with myocardial infarction. This effect was associated with enhanced transplanted EPC survival and autologous EPC mobilization.
</abstract>

</text>
