<title>
Creatine supplementation decreases oxidative DNA damage and lipid peroxidation induced by a single bout of resistance exercise.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Rahimi, R. Creatine supplementation decreases oxidative DNA damage and lipid peroxidation induced by a single bout of resistance exercise. J Strength Cond Res 25(12): 3448-3455, 2011-Creatine (Cr), or methyl guanidine-acetic acid, can be either ingested from exogenous sources, such as fish or meat, or produced endogenously by the body, primarily in the liver. It is used as an ergogenic aid to improve muscle mass, strength, and endurance. Heretofore, Cr's positive therapeutic benefits in various oxidative stress-associated diseases have been reported in the literature and, recently, Cr has also been shown to exert direct antioxidant effects. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of an acute bout of resistance exercise (RE) on oxidative stress response and oxidative DNA damage in male athletes and whether supplementation with Cr could negate any observed differences. Twenty-seven resistance-trained men were randomly divided into a Cr supplementation group (the Cr group [21.6 ± 3.6 years], taking 4 × 5 g Cr monohydrate per day) or a placebo (PL) supplementation group (the PL group [21.2 ± 3.2 years], taking 4 × 5 g maltodextrin per day). A double-blind research design was employed for a 7-day supplementation period. Before and after the seventh day of supplementation, the subjects performed an RE protocol (7 sets of 4 exercises using 60-90 1 repetition maximum) in the flat pyramid loading pattern. Blood and urine samples taken before, immediately, and 24-hour postexercise were analyzed for plasma malondialdehyde (MDA) and urinary 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) excretion. Before the supplementation period, a significant increase in the urinary 8-OHdG excretion and plasma MDA levels was observed after RE. The Cr supplementation induces a significant increase in athletics performance, and it attenuated the changes observed in the urinary 8-OHdG excretion and plasma MDA. These results indicate that Cr supplementation reduced oxidative DNA damage and lipid peroxidation induced by a single bout of RE.
</abstract>

</text>
