<title>
Antigen-antibody interactions and structural flexibility of a femtomolar-affinity antibody.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
The femtomolar-affinity mutant antibody (4M5.3) generated by directed evolution is interesting because of the potential of antibody engineering. In this study, the mutant and its wild type (4-4-20) were compared in terms of antigen-antibody interactions and structural flexibility to elucidate the effects of directed evolution. For this purpose, multiple steered molecular dynamics (SMD) simulations were performed. The pulling forces of SMD simulations elucidated the regions that form strong attractive interactions in the binding pocket. Structural analysis in these regions showed two important mutations for improving attractive interactions. First, mutation of Tyr102(H) to Ser (sequence numbering of Protein Data Bank entry  1FLR ) played a role in resolving the steric hindrance on the pathway of the antigen in the binding pocket. Second, mutation of Asp31(H) to His played a role in resolving electrostatic repulsion. Potentials of mean force (PMFs) of both the wild type and the mutant showed landscapes that do not include obvious intermediate states and go directly to the bound state. These landscapes were regarded as funnel-like binding free energy landscapes. Furthermore, the structural flexibility based on the fluctuations of the positions of atoms was analyzed. It was shown that the fluctuations in the positions of the antigen and residues in contact with antigen tend to be smaller in the mutant than in the wild type. This result suggested that structural flexibility decreases as affinity is improved by directed evolution. This suggestion is similar to the relationship between affinity and flexibility for in vivo affinity maturation, which was suggested by Romesberg and co-workers [Jimenez, R., et al. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.100, 92-97]. Consequently, the relationship was found to be applicable up to femotomolar affinity levels.
</abstract>

</text>
