<title>
Initial treatment with 15 mg of prednisolone daily is sufficient for most patients with subacute thyroiditis in Japan.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
BACKGROUND: Oral glucocorticoids are administered in moderate and severe cases of subacute thyroiditis (SAT), providing dramatic relief from pain and fever. However, there have been no reports regarding the optimal dose of prednisolone (PSL) for treatment of SAT. In this study, we used 15 mg/day of PSL as the initial dosage and tapered it by 5 mg every 2 weeks. We assessed the effectiveness of this treatment protocol. METHODS: We examined 384 consecutive and untreated patients with SAT who visited our thyroid clinic between February 2005 and December 2008. We excluded patients who did not fit our protocol, and the final number of subjects was 219. When patients complained of pain in their neck or C-reactive protein (CRP) was still high, physicians were able to extend the tapering of the dose of PSL or increase it at 2-week intervals. The endpoint of the study was the duration of the PSL medication. We also compared the severity of thyrotoxicosis and rate of hypothyroidism after SAT between the short medication group (patients who recovered within 6 weeks) and long medication group (patients who recovered in 12 weeks or more). RESULTS: The number of patients whose thyroiditis improved within 6 weeks and did not recur was 113 (51.6%), and 61 (27.9%) improved within 7 to 8 weeks and did not have a recurrence. The longest duration was 40 weeks. Seven patients (3.2%) needed increases in the dosage of PSL. Thyroid hormone (free thyroxine and free triiodothyronine) levels measured at the initial visit in the short medication group were significantly higher than those in the long medication group (p<0.05). Serum CRP, male-to-female ratio, body weight, and age showed no differences between the two groups. There were no differences in the rate of hypothyroidism after SAT between the two groups (p=0.0632). CONCLUSIONS: The treatment protocol that we employed had 15 mg/day of PSL as the initial dosage for the treatment of SAT, with tapering by 5 mg every 2 weeks, and was effective and safe for Japanese patients. However, 20% of patients with SAT needed longer than 8 weeks to recover from the inflammation.
</abstract>

</text>
