<title>
Use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors for chronic myeloid leukemia: management of patients and practical applications for pharmacy practitioners.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
OBJECTIVE: To summarize the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for treatment of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and provide practical information for patient management. DATA SOURCES: Literature was retrieved from PubMed (2000-January 2011), using the search terms chronic myeloid leukemia and tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Abstracts presented at the 2008-2010 annual meetings of the American Society of Hematology and the American Society of Clinical Oncology, reference citations from identified publications, as well as the manufacturers' full prescribing information for cited drugs, also were reviewed. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Articles evaluating the efficacy and safety of the TKIs imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib were evaluated. Focus was placed on publications supporting management of patients with CML in the chronic phase. Reports presenting clinical trial information of TKIs in development also were included. DATA SYNTHESIS: The discovery of targeted tyrosine kinase inhibition of BCR-ABL kinase dramatically changed the treatment of CML. Imatinib, the first TKI approved for treatment of patients with Philadelphia chromosome--positive CML, demonstrated significant superiority over the previous standard of care: interferon plus cytarabine. The newer, more potent TKIs, nilotinib and dasatinib, have demonstrated improved efficacy over imatinib as first-line therapy and provide an effective option for patients with resistance or intolerance to imatinib. CONCLUSIONS: To maximize efficacy of TKI therapy, close patient management, involving frequent monitoring of patient response, is essential. Given the importance of continuing TKI therapy, early recognition and management of adverse events are critical to optimizing outcomes in patients with CML. In addition to the safety profile and considerations of comorbidities, additional factors can affect therapeutic selection, including drug-drug and drug-food interactions. Research investigating new therapies, particularly for patients harboring the T315I mutation-which remains refractory to current TKIs-continues in the quest to improve outcomes in patients with CML.
</abstract>

</text>
