<title>
Mapping of origin of replication in Themococcales.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Genome replication is a crucial and essential process for the continuity of life.In all organisms it starts at a specific region of the genome known as origin of replication (Ori) site. The number of Ori sites varies in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Replication starts at a single Ori site in bacteria, but in eukaryotes multiple Ori sites are used for fast copying across all chromosomes. The situation becomes complex in archaea, where some groups have single and others have multiple origins of replication. Themococcales, are a hyperthermophilic order of archaea. They are anaerobes and heterotrophs-peptide fermenters, sulphate reducers, methanogens being some of the examples of metabolic types. In this paper we have applied a combination of multiple in silico approaches - Z curve, the cell division cycle (cdc6) gene location and location of consensus origin recognition box (ORB) sequences for location of origin of replication in Thermococcus onnurineus, Thermococcus gammatolerans and other Themococcales and compared the results to that of the well-documented case of Pyrococcus abyssi. The motivation behind this study is to find the number of Ori sites based on the data available for members of this order. Results from this in silico analysis show that the Themococcales have a single origin of replication.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Background
he path breaking work of arl oese and ox established the concept of three distinct 
domains of living beings- acteria, rchaea and ukarya[1]. 
owever the debate about the evolutionary relationships between the three domains of life still 
continues. n terms of  replication it seems that the archaea are closer to eukaryotes than bacteria 
since proteins involved in  replication in archaea share more similarities with their counterparts 
in eukarya[2].  replication is an 
integral part of cell division and a necessary condition for the equal distribution of genetic 
material from the parental cell lineage to its offspring. t is a highly conserved process with 
high accuracy and small error rate. o ensure high fidelity, the cell has an array of enzymes and 
a regulatory mechanism to coordinate the replication process [3]. 
acterial replication involves the na. A protein binding to a stretch of DNA called dnaA boxes, 
located close to the origin of replication. These nucleotide sequences are also called origin 
recognition boxes (ORB). There are AT rich region upstream of the replication site named DUE 
(duplex unwinding element), which facilitate the opening of DNA double helix for the purpose of 
replication. Eukaryotic replication has to occur at multiple sites simultaneously and requires a 
complicated machinery called origin recognition complex (ORC). The exact working of this machinery 
is not yet fully understood. The third domain, archaea has replication proteins which are homologous 
to the eukaryotic proteins, but are fewer in number. Therefore a thorough study of the replication 
process of archaea will help in understanding the replication process in eukaryotes. The archaea 
however do not show a uniform pattern of replication. Some like P.abyssi 
[4], the first experimentally studied archaeon, 
have a single origin of replication like bacteria, but some like Sulfolobus solfataricus 
[5] and Haloferax volcanii 
[6] have multiple origins. 
The archaeal chromosomal Ori initiation site was first identified experimentally in 
Pyrococcus abyssi. This was located within the non coding region downstream of a 
gene encoding a homolog of the eukaryotic cdc6 gene. This intergenic region is very rich in AT content 
and has several direct and inverted repeats. 
Prediction of origin of replication in archaea has attracted immense interest during past few years. 
Since the archaea are notoriously difficult to culture in the laboratory, in silico analysis of Ori 
in archaea will become more important with the availability of an increasing number of complete genome 
sequences. There are about 91 archaea whose genomes have been sequenced either fully or up to the 
draft assembly level (June 2010), but there are very few species for which experimental data is 
available. There is a big gap between the number of sequenced genomes and experimentally mapped Ori 
sites in archaea. Since in silico methods are cost effective in terms of saving man-power as well as 
laboratory costs, they can be used advantageously to predict replication origin(s) in archaea. 
The first clue that helped identify the putative replication origins came from an observation 
that there are compositional asymmetries between the leading strand and lagging strand in bacteria. 
By using a DNA walk method, Lobry noticed that the DNA walk changes polarity at the origin of 
replication [7]. Later, various 
methods were proposed to measure the asymmetrical distribution of nucleotide composition around 
the replication origin, of which GC skew and Z curve (a combination of various nucleotides disparity 
plots) are extensively applied in finding Ori in bacterial and archaeal genome respectively 
[8]. GC skew analysis has 
been widely applied for mapping Ori sites in bacteria, viruses and mitochondria. It is defined as 
(Cβ�’G)/(C+G) where C and G are the number of occurrences of C and G nucleotides in a subsequence covered 
by a sliding window scanning the DNA sequence. The cumulative graph of GC skew shows a sharp peak at 
the Ori site. But in archaeal genomes this approach fails because they do not have sharp nucleotide 
skew due to the mosaic nature of their genome. Z curve could be applied up to certain level of confidence 
for archaea, but it has also its limitations [9]. 
Hence nucleotide skew and location of its extremum cannot locate the Ori site in archaea. The 
order-specific location of ORB boxes, as well as the location of the cdc6 gene upstream of the 
putative origin of replication may reinforce accuracy of prediction of the origin of replication. This 
is the strategy applied in this work.
Thermococcales are the most explored and studied order among the phylum Euryarchaeota of archaea. 
They thrive in thermal vents of the sea floor or deep oil wells in very hot environments. The typical 
optimum growth temperature for Themococcales is about 75 degrees centigrade, and it may vary from 60 
to 110 degree centigrade. Being abundant in their environmental niche, they form an important 
constituent of the marine hydrothermal vents eco-system. Some members of this order e.g. 
Pyrococcus abyssi are well studied and the Ori site has been mapped experimentally 
and the data obtained is used to make prediction about other members of this order. Recently, the genome 
of archaeon Thermococcus onnurineus has been sequenced [11]. 
The genome size is 1.8 Mb long and forms a single replicon (chromosome) without any plasmid and total 
GC content is about 51.3%. T. onnurineus belongs to the order Themococcales. The complete genome of 
another Themococcale, Thermococcus gammatolerance has also been recently sequenced 
[16]. The replication origin of both the genomes 
has not been identified yet.  The Z curve analysis of Thermococcus onnurineus shows 
one global sharp peak y curve (Figure 1). It has a single cdc6 
gene situated adjacent to the global peak on the complementary strand. The upstream intergenic region 
between cdc6 and a hypothetical protein shows several direct and inverted repeats 
(Figure 2). Several consensus ORB sequences are also 
distributed in this intergenic region.  For Thermococcus gammatolerance also there is a clear peak 
of the y curve, locating the putative Ori site, with the cdc6 gene being located close to the peak 
(Figure 5).
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Methodology
he genome of seven hemococcales{yrococcus horikoshii (_000961), 
yrococcus abyssi (_000868), yrococcus furiosus (_003413), 
hermococcus kodakaraensis (_006624), hermococcus onnurineus 
(_011529), hermococcus gammatolerans (_012804), hermococcus sibiricus 
(_012883) were downloaded from  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. 
 script/program to calculate and plot the  curve was written in  (http://www.mathworks.com). 
he  curve was plotted for all the genomes and the individual disparity curves were plotted on x, y, 
z axes. 
he  curve is a curve in three-dimensional space, constituting a unique representation of a  
sequence which has all the property of the given sequence. he x curve is the purine-pyrimidine 
(-) disparity curve, the y curve is the amino-keto (-) disparity curve and the z curve shows 
the disparity of occurrence along the  sequence between the strong- weak hydrogen bonded nucleotides 
(-). n this method [9] the given 
 sequence is scanned using a sliding window approach, and keeping track of cumulative counts. 
uppose in a given subsequence the purine (/) count is greater than the pyrimidine (/) count, and 
then the value of x is greater than zero. or the reverse case, it is less than zero, or if it is equal, 
then the value of x is zero. imilarly if in a subsequence the count of amino (/) nucleotides are 
greater than the keto (/) nucleotides, then y for that subsequence is greater than zero. lso if the 
weakly bonded nucleotides ( /) are greater than the strongly bonded (/) ones, then value of z is 
greater than zero, if it is less, than value of z is negative and if it is equal then, value of z is 
zero. he x or / disparity curve or plot as well as the y or / disparity curve can be used to locate 
the origin of replication. hese disparity plots are sometimes more useful than the widely used  or
  disparity plots introduced by obry [7]. 
he cdc6 gene location and copy number were identified with  database 
(http://www.genome.jp/kegg). 
onsensus  sequences were taken from the data on the extensively studied thermophilic archaeon 
.abyssi [4].Methodology
The genome of seven Themococcales{Pyrococcus horikoshii (NC_000961), 
Pyrococcus abyssi (NC_000868), Pyrococcus furiosus (NC_003413), 
Thermococcus kodakaraensis (NC_006624), Thermococcus onnurineus 
(NC_011529), Thermococcus gammatolerans (NC_012804), Thermococcus sibiricus 
(NC_012883) were downloaded from NCBI http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. 
A script/program to calculate and plot the Z curve was written in MATLAB (http://www.mathworks.com). 
The Z curve was plotted for all the genomes and the individual disparity curves were plotted on x, y, 
z axes. 
The Z curve is a curve in three-dimensional space, constituting a unique representation of a DNA 
sequence which has all the property of the given sequence. The x curve is the purine-pyrimidine 
(R-Y) disparity curve, the y curve is the amino-keto (M-K) disparity curve and the z curve shows 
the disparity of occurrence along the DNA sequence between the strong- weak hydrogen bonded nucleotides 
(S-W). In this method [9] the given 
DNA sequence is scanned using a sliding window approach, and keeping track of cumulative counts. 
Suppose in a given subsequence the purine (A/G) count is greater than the pyrimidine (C/T) count, and 
then the value of x is greater than zero. For the reverse case, it is less than zero, or if it is equal, 
then the value of x is zero. Similarly if in a subsequence the count of amino (A/C) nucleotides are 
greater than the keto (T/G) nucleotides, then y for that subsequence is greater than zero. Also if the 
weakly bonded nucleotides ( A/T) are greater than the strongly bonded (C/G) ones, then value of z is 
greater than zero, if it is less, than value of z is negative and if it is equal then, value of z is 
zero. The x or R/Y disparity curve or plot as well as the y or M/K disparity curve can be used to locate 
the origin of replication. These disparity plots are sometimes more useful than the widely used AT or
 GC disparity plots introduced by Lobry [7]. 
The cdc6 gene location and copy number were identified with KEGG database 
(http://www.genome.jp/kegg). 
Consensus ORB sequences were taken from the data on the extensively studied thermophilic archaeon 
P.abyssi [4].
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Results
he archaea whose ri sites have been mapped experimentally show abrupt change at the site of origin 
of replication in either the x (signifying purine-pyrimidine skew) or y curve (signifying amino-keto skew). 
wo archaea for which ri sites have been located experimentally (. abyssi and 
. acidocaldarious) have been analyzed with  curve (igure 1&
igure 1b). n . abyssi , a sharp peak (in blue 
line) corresponds to the origin of replication and cdc6 gene is placed adjacent to the ri site 
(igure 1). n . acidocaldarius we see three 
sharp peaks for the y curve (blue line) which corresponds to experimentally defined ri sites. 
here are three cdc6 genes in . acidocalderius, two of which occur close to two 
consecutive peaks. he third cdc6 gene is somewhat distantly situated upstream of the third peak position. 
he location of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd cdc6 gene is from 101 to 1261, 
578164 to 579357 and 724282 to 725529 nt respectively (igure 1b). 
et lab study has proved that . acidocaldarius has three origins of replication 
[10]. aving tested our method on known 
experimental results, we applied it to locate the ri for the remaining six hemococcale genomes, other 
than .abyssi. hermococcus onnurineus genome has been recently sequenced 
[11], and no experimental data is available for 
the ri site. t has a single circular chromosome without any plasmid. ll replication machinery 
proteins like, dc6, ini hromosome aintenance () and roliferating ell uclear ntigen  () 
occur as single copy,  and the y curve shows a sharp peak at 1500 kb and  cdc6  gene is situated  
adjacent to this peak (igure 1). everal other genes crucial 
for  replication are also clustered around cdc6 gene shown in igure 4.

he location of the cdc6 gene is from 1508116 to 1509363 nt on the complementary strand. 
he x curve also shows a peak in this region. igure 3 shows 
the compact view of the genes involved in locating putative ri sites. n the complementary strand 
the cdc6 gene is contiguous to the  polymerase  small subunit which is followed by the  
polymerase  large subunit. ll these proteins play a crucial role in  replication dynamics, so 
it is supposed that they should lie close to each other. n the upstream region of the cdc6 gene lies 
a hypothetical protein after which there is an  rich intergenic region (-1510249 to -1510837 nt) of 
589 nt long, having around 64%  in contrast to the genome-wide  composition of 49%. 
here are several direct and inverted repeats with several tracts of  and  in this region.  e 
have also found that some repeats in this region are common to the ri region of . abyssi, which 
has been experimentally mapped. e have established two long s similar to .abyssi shown below 
(igure 3).
  urther analysis of ri sites 
of other members of order hemococcale shows close similarities with . abysii. n 
all members the cdc6 gene has a single copy. he length varies between 1248 to 1348 nt and in most 
of the cases it is below 1300 nt (except . gammatolerans and . horikoshii). 
he location of the cdc6 gene varies from species to species. n most of the members it is situated on 
template strand while in some members (yrococcus horikoshii,hermococcus onnurineus, hermococcus 
gammatolerans & hermococcus sibiricus) it is situated on the complementary strand. 
he y curve for all the members are smooth and show a single sharp peak. he cdc6 gene location around 
these peaks seems to be conserved in most of the members, that is, it lies in close proximity to the 
peak of the y curve. he results for .sibiricus in this study replicate the findings in 
[12]. he region upstream of the cdc6 gene 
is t-rich. resence of consensus  sequences varies from species to species and we have mapped the 
 in . onnurineus, and . sibiricus 
(igure 3, igure 4).
n most of the cases copy number of the cdc6 gene is directly linked with the number of replication 
sites in genome, that is if there are multiple copies of the cdc6 gene, it indicates a possibility of 
multiple ri sites in that genome. ll hemococcales sequenced till now have the single copy of the cdc6 
gene. ll hemococcales for which experimentally mapped ri region is known show that they have a single 
origin of replication. n able 1 (see supplementary material) 
we have given the details of cdc6 gene in all hemococcalesas mapped in this study.Results
The archaea whose Ori sites have been mapped experimentally show abrupt change at the site of origin 
of replication in either the x (signifying purine-pyrimidine skew) or y curve (signifying amino-keto skew). 
Two archaea for which Ori sites have been located experimentally (P. abyssi and 
S. acidocaldarious) have been analyzed with Z curve (Figure 1&
Figure 1b). In P. abyssi , a sharp peak (in blue 
line) corresponds to the origin of replication and cdc6 gene is placed adjacent to the Ori site 
(Figure 1). In S. acidocaldarius we see three 
sharp peaks for the y curve (blue line) which corresponds to experimentally defined Ori sites. 
There are three cdc6 genes in S. acidocalderius, two of which occur close to two 
consecutive peaks. The third cdc6 gene is somewhat distantly situated upstream of the third peak position. 
The location of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd cdc6 gene is from 101 to 1261, 
578164 to 579357 and 724282 to 725529 nt respectively (Figure 1b). 
Wet lab study has proved that S. acidocaldarius has three origins of replication 
[10]. Having tested our method on known 
experimental results, we applied it to locate the Ori for the remaining six Themococcale genomes, other 
than P.abyssi. Thermococcus onnurineus genome has been recently sequenced 
[11], and no experimental data is available for 
the Ori site. It has a single circular chromosome without any plasmid. All replication machinery 
proteins like, Cdc6, Mini Chromosome Maintenance (MCM) and Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen  (PCNA) 
occur as single copy,  and the y curve shows a sharp peak at 1500 kb and  cdc6  gene is situated  
adjacent to this peak (Figure 1). Several other genes crucial 
for DNA replication are also clustered around cdc6 gene shown in Figure 4.

The location of the cdc6 gene is from 1508116 to 1509363 nt on the complementary strand. 
The x curve also shows a peak in this region. Figure 3 shows 
the compact view of the genes involved in locating putative Ori sites. In the complementary strand 
the cdc6 gene is contiguous to the DNA polymerase II small subunit which is followed by the DNA 
polymerase II large subunit. All these proteins play a crucial role in DNA replication dynamics, so 
it is supposed that they should lie close to each other. In the upstream region of the cdc6 gene lies 
a hypothetical protein after which there is an AT rich intergenic region (-1510249 to -1510837 nt) of 
589 nt long, having around 64% AT in contrast to the genome-wide AT composition of 49%. 
There are several direct and inverted repeats with several tracts of A and T in this region.  We 
have also found that some repeats in this region are common to the Ori region of P. abyssi, which 
has been experimentally mapped. We have established two long ORBs similar to P.abyssi shown below 
(Figure 3).
TTCCAGCGGAAACTGAAGGGGTCAAAGN TTCCAGTGGAAATGAAACTCTGGGGGGT Further analysis of Ori sites 
of other members of order Themococcale shows close similarities with P. abysii. In 
all members the cdc6 gene has a single copy. The length varies between 1248 to 1348 nt and in most 
of the cases it is below 1300 nt (except T. gammatolerans and P. horikoshii). 
The location of the cdc6 gene varies from species to species. In most of the members it is situated on 
template strand while in some members (Pyrococcus horikoshii,Thermococcus onnurineus, Thermococcus 
gammatolerans & Thermococcus sibiricus) it is situated on the complementary strand. 
The y curve for all the members are smooth and show a single sharp peak. The cdc6 gene location around 
these peaks seems to be conserved in most of the members, that is, it lies in close proximity to the 
peak of the y curve. The results for T.sibiricus in this study replicate the findings in 
[12]. The region upstream of the cdc6 gene 
is At-rich. Presence of consensus ORB sequences varies from species to species and we have mapped the 
ORB in T. onnurineus, and T. sibiricus 
(Figure 3, Figure 4).
In most of the cases copy number of the cdc6 gene is directly linked with the number of replication 
sites in genome, that is if there are multiple copies of the cdc6 gene, it indicates a possibility of 
multiple Ori sites in that genome. All Themococcales sequenced till now have the single copy of the cdc6 
gene. All Themococcales for which experimentally mapped Ori region is known show that they have a single 
origin of replication. In Table 1 (see supplementary material) 
we have given the details of cdc6 gene in all Themococcalesas mapped in this study.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Discussion
ince their identification as a different domain of life by oese and ox 
[1], the archaea have been the subject of 
intensive investigation. everal   genomic sequences   from   a   number   of   archaeal species 
and strains have meanwhile been published. ue to their distinct nature and habitat archaea have 
always intrigued scientists, though now they are no longer found to be extremophiles alone but also 
mesophiles and psychrophiles [13]. 
he most interesting component of the archaeal cell is its replication machinery, which shows 
more similarity to eukaryotic machinery than to the bacterial one. lmost all proteins involved 
in archaeal genome replication have their homologues in eukaryotes, so it is expected that 
understanding genome replication mechanism in archaea will give an insight into the functioning 
of the genome replication dynamics in eukaryotes as well [14]. 
owever the eukaryotes have multiple ri, but as noted earlier, the number of ri sites in archaea 
varies. n some archaea like the hermococcales there is single ri, but in others there are multiple. 
xperimental determination and validation of ri site(s) in archaea is a daunting task and there are 
several biological and economical constraints as well, so an in silico approach to map ri region is 
not only an alternate way, but appears the only way to accelerate the mapping of ri site up to 
certain level of confidence [15]. 
here are several tools available for finding putative ri site. he widely known and applied 
approach is  skew for bacteria and  curve for archaeal genomes.  skew works well for finding 
ri in bacterial genomes, because they have pronounced nucleotide skew and show nucleotide disparity 
for leading and lagging strand at the site of replication origin. ut this approach fails in archaea 
because their  sequences do not show a pronounced nucleotide skew in general. he combined use 
of nucleotide disparity curves, location of the cdc6 gene, and identification of origin recognition 
boxes (), maps the single origin of replication in .abyssi, 
. gammatolerans and .sibericus, as well as all the other 
hemococcales studied in this work. he size of the cdc6 gene is approximately 1300 nt, and the  
of .abyssi are found in . sibericus as well as . onnurineus, 
though with some minor mutational changes. hermococcus gammatolerans is one of the 
most radio-resistant organisms known amongst the archaea and is of great interest to microbiologists 
to compare with the well known radio-resistant bacteria einococcus rodiodurans, 
to find the similarities and differences in their genome and proteome 
[16].
he exact number of cdc6 does not always tally with the number of ri, as is seen in  
alobacterium sp., where the copy number of cdc6 is 13, but the number of origins found by 
our method is 3(data not shown). his implies that cdc6 probably performs multiple functions 
during archaeal replication.
he reason behind some rchaea, like, alobacterium sp, and . volcanii, ulfolobus 
solfataricus having multiple ri, but .abyssi and .jannaschii 
having single ri is not clear at present. he archaea are divided into four main phyla, uryarchaeota 
(e.g. .abyssi, .jannaschii, alobacterium sp.), 
renarchaeota (e.g. ulfolobus solfataricus,eropyrum pernix), 
orarchaeota and anoarchaeota (with one member each at present).hile no overall trend has been seen 
so far, this study of ri mapping in silico of the order hemococcale is reassuringly simple 
and uniform.he sequence of  also differs from case to case but orais et al.
[6] have given a consensus  for uryarchaeota, 
which is 79% similar to the consensus  found here for hemococcales.Discussion
Since their identification as a different domain of life by Woese and Fox 
[1], the archaea have been the subject of 
intensive investigation. Several   genomic sequences   from   a   number   of   archaeal species 
and strains have meanwhile been published. Due to their distinct nature and habitat archaea have 
always intrigued scientists, though now they are no longer found to be extremophiles alone but also 
mesophiles and psychrophiles [13]. 
The most interesting component of the archaeal cell is its replication machinery, which shows 
more similarity to eukaryotic machinery than to the bacterial one. Almost all proteins involved 
in archaeal genome replication have their homologues in eukaryotes, so it is expected that 
understanding genome replication mechanism in archaea will give an insight into the functioning 
of the genome replication dynamics in eukaryotes as well [14]. 
However the eukaryotes have multiple Ori, but as noted earlier, the number of Ori sites in archaea 
varies. In some archaea like the Thermococcales there is single Ori, but in others there are multiple. 
Experimental determination and validation of Ori site(s) in archaea is a daunting task and there are 
several biological and economical constraints as well, so an in silico approach to map Ori region is 
not only an alternate way, but appears the only way to accelerate the mapping of Ori site up to 
certain level of confidence [15]. 
There are several tools available for finding putative Ori site. The widely known and applied 
approach is GC skew for bacteria and Z curve for archaeal genomes. GC skew works well for finding 
Ori in bacterial genomes, because they have pronounced nucleotide skew and show nucleotide disparity 
for leading and lagging strand at the site of replication origin. But this approach fails in archaea 
because their DNA sequences do not show a pronounced nucleotide skew in general. The combined use 
of nucleotide disparity curves, location of the cdc6 gene, and identification of origin recognition 
boxes (ORB), maps the single origin of replication in P.abyssi, 
T. gammatolerans and T.sibericus, as well as all the other 
Themococcales studied in this work. The size of the cdc6 gene is approximately 1300 nt, and the ORB 
of P.abyssi are found in T. sibericus as well as T. onnurineus, 
though with some minor mutational changes. Thermococcus gammatolerans is one of the 
most radio-resistant organisms known amongst the archaea and is of great interest to microbiologists 
to compare with the well known radio-resistant bacteria Deinococcus rodiodurans, 
to find the similarities and differences in their genome and proteome 
[16].
The exact number of cdc6 does not always tally with the number of Ori, as is seen in  
Halobacterium sp., where the copy number of cdc6 is 13, but the number of origins found by 
our method is 3(data not shown). This implies that cdc6 probably performs multiple functions 
during archaeal replication.
The reason behind some Archaea, like, Halobacterium sp, and H. volcanii, Sulfolobus 
solfataricus having multiple Ori, but P.abyssi and M.jannaschii 
having single Ori is not clear at present. The archaea are divided into four main phyla, Euryarchaeota 
(e.g. P.abyssi, M.jannaschii, Halobacterium sp.), 
Crenarchaeota (e.g. Sulfolobus solfataricus,Aeropyrum pernix), 
Korarchaeota and Nanoarchaeota (with one member each at present).While no overall trend has been seen 
so far, this study of Ori mapping in silico of the order Themococcale is reassuringly simple 
and uniform.The sequence of ORB also differs from case to case but Norais et al.
[6] have given a consensus ORB for Euryarchaeota, 
which is 79% similar to the consensus ORB found here for Themococcales.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Conclusion
he methodology used in this study, though adequate, has to be improved by looking for 
co-localization of the other proteins involved in the replication process, like , , 
 and  olymerase , and a refinement of finding order-specific s over phylum-specific 
s. he future plan of work involves a systematization of in silico mapping of ri sites in all 
sequenced archaeal genomes.

he origin of multiple ri sites in archaea is not clear. he ulfolobales, an example of which is 
.acidocaldarius, have three ri sites which appears helpful for fast replication 
of these extremophiles whose optimum growth temperature () is about 80 degrees centigrade. 
ut the hemococcales, which have  in the same range or higher, clearly have a single origin 
of replication as demonstrated in this work. n the other hand, alophiles which have lower growth 
temperatures, like .volcanii [6] 
and alobacterium sp. have multiple ri sites. oes this imply that the replication machinery 
evolved repeatedly and randomly for each order of each phylum of archaea? s ature really that 
chaotic and profligate? his aspect of replication process of archaea demands concerted and co-operative 
work by laboratory scientists as well as omputational iologists to lead to a definite answer to this 
question.Conclusion
The methodology used in this study, though adequate, has to be improved by looking for 
co-localization of the other proteins involved in the replication process, like MCM, PCNA, 
RFC and DNA Polymerase II, and a refinement of finding order-specific ORBs over phylum-specific 
ORBs. The future plan of work involves a systematization of in silico mapping of Ori sites in all 
sequenced archaeal genomes.

The origin of multiple Ori sites in archaea is not clear. The Sulfolobales, an example of which is 
S.acidocaldarius, have three Ori sites which appears helpful for fast replication 
of these extremophiles whose optimum growth temperature (OGT) is about 80 degrees centigrade. 
But the Themococcales, which have OGT in the same range or higher, clearly have a single origin 
of replication as demonstrated in this work. On the other hand, Halophiles which have lower growth 
temperatures, like H.volcanii [6] 
and Halobacterium sp. have multiple Ori sites. Does this imply that the replication machinery 
evolved repeatedly and randomly for each order of each phylum of archaea? Is Nature really that 
chaotic and profligate? This aspect of replication process of archaea demands concerted and co-operative 
work by laboratory scientists as well as Computational Biologists to lead to a definite answer to this 
question.
</sections.4>

<sections.5>
Supplementary material
ata 1Supplementary material
Data 1
</sections.5>

</text>
