<title>
Identification of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) transmission from a 29-year-old daughter to her mother in Shanghai, China.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
BACKGROUND AND METHODS: Routes of intrafamilial transmission of HIV-1 are not always clear. Here, we describe transmission to a mother from her 29-year-old daughter within a family setting through clinical, epidemiological and molecular evidence. We evaluated the risk factors for intrafamilial transmission of HIV-1 infection through qualitative epidemiology following pol and env gene sequencing and phylogenetic analysis. RESULT: The nucleotide sequences of the pol and env genes of the two strains from the two patients in the family were 99 % and 100 % identical, respectively, and they clustered with CRF07_BC, which includes the main recombinant strains in Shanghai, China. The diversity of genetic clones between the env and pol genes was insignificant (p > 0.05). The drug-resistance-associated mutation positions of the two viral strains were basically similar and indicated that both were susceptible to the first-line anti-retroviral drugs including zidovudine (AZT), lamivudine (3TC), efavirenz (EFV) and nevirapine (NVP) prior to the initiation of highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART), providing additional evidence of a close similarity between the quasispecies of the two family members. CONCLUSION: In this family, the two strains of the virus, isolated from the mother and her adult daughter, had very high homology. In the context of their clinical histories, we can make a conclusion that the mother was infected by the virus in her daughter's blood or other body fluids, but no overt transmission route has been clarified. This investigation also suggested that intimate personal exposure in the same household can contribute to HIV-1 transmission and underscores the need to educate persons who care for or are in contact with HIV-infected persons in household settings where such exposures may occur.
</abstract>

</text>
