<title>
Organophosphate-induced intermediate syndrome: aetiology and relationships with myopathy.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
The intermediate syndrome (IMS) following organophosphorus (OP) insecticide poisoning was first described in the mid-1980s. The syndrome described comprised characteristic symptoms and signs occurring after apparent recovery from the acute cholinergic syndrome. As the syndrome occurred after the acute cholinergic syndrome but before organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy, the syndrome was called 'intermediate syndrome'. The IMS occurs in approximately 20% of patients following oral exposure to OP pesticides, with no clear association between the particular OP pesticide involved and the development of the syndrome. It usually becomes established 2-4 days after exposure when the symptoms and signs of the acute cholinergic syndrome (e.g. muscle fasciculations, muscarinic signs) are no longer obvious. The characteristic features of the IMS are weakness of the muscles of respiration (diaphragm, intercostal muscles and accessory muscles including neck muscles) and of proximal limb muscles. Accompanying features often include weakness of muscles innervated by some cranial nerves. It is now emerging that the degree and extent of muscle weakness may vary following the onset of the IMS. Thus, some patients may only have weakness of neck muscles whilst others may have weakness of neck muscles and proximal limb muscles. These patients may not require ventilatory care but close observation and monitoring of respiratory function is mandatory. Management is essentially that of rapidly developing respiratory distress and respiratory failure. Delays in instituting ventilatory care will result in death. Initiation of ventilatory care and maintenance of ventilatory care often requires minimal doses of non-depolarising muscle relaxants. The use of depolarising muscle relaxants such as suxamethonium is contraindicated in OP poisoning. The duration of ventilatory care required by patients may differ considerably and it is usual for patients to need ventilatory support for 7-15 days and even up to 21 days. Weaning from ventilatory care is best carried out in stages, with provision of continuous positive airway pressure prior to complete weaning. Continuous and close monitoring of respiratory function (arterial oxygen saturation, partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood) and acid-base status are an absolute necessity. Prophylactic antibiotics are usually not required unless there has been evidence of aspiration of material into the lungs. Close monitoring of fluid and electrolyte balance is mandatory in view of the profuse offensive diarrhoea that most patients develop. Maintenance of nutrition, physiotherapy, prevention of bed sores and other routine measures to minimise discomfort during ventilatory care are necessary. Recovery from the intermediate syndrome is normally complete and without any sequelae. The usefulness of oximes during the IMS remains uncertain. In animal experiments, very early administration of oximes has prevented the occurrence of myopathy. There are reports from developed countries where administration of oximes at recommended doses and within 2 hours of ingestion of OP insecticide did not prevent the onset of the IMS. Controlled randomised clinical studies are necessary to evaluate the efficacy of oximes in combating the IMS. Electrophysiological studies following OP poisoning have revealed three characteristic phenomena: (i) repetitive firing following a single stimulus; (ii) gradual reduction in twitch height or compound muscle action potential followed by an increase with repetitive stimulation (the 'decrement-increment response'); and (iii) continued reduction in twitch height or compound muscle action potential with repetitive simulation ('decrementing response'). Of these, the decrementing response is the most frequent finding during the IMS, whilst repetitive firing is observed during the acute cholinergic syndrome. The distribution of the weakness in human cases of the IMS, in general, parallels the distribution of the myopathy observed in a number of studies in experimental animals. This has led to speculation that myopathy is involved in the causation of the IMS. However, while myopathy and the IMS have a common origin in acetylcholine accumulation, they are not causally related to one another.
</abstract>

</text>
