<title>
Development of a flow cytometry live cell assay for the screening of inhibitors of hepatitis C virus (HCV) replication.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
In this study, we established a flow cytometry live cell-based assay that permits the screening of hepatitis C virus (HCV) inhibitors. Specifically, we created a stable cell line, which harbors a subgenomic replicon encoding an NS5A-YFP fusion protein. This system allows direct measurement of YFP fluorescence in live hepatoma cells in which the HCV replicon replicates. We demonstrated that this stable fluorescent system permits the rapid and sensitive quantification of HCV replication inhibition by direct-acting antiviral agents (DAA) including protease and NS5A inhibitors and host-targeting antiviral agents (HTA) including cyclophilin inhibitors. This flow cytometry-based live cell assay is well suited for multiple applications such as the evaluation of HCV replication as well as antiviral drug screening.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
1
 is the major causative agent of acute and chronic liver diseases [1]. early 200 million people worldwide (3% of the population), including 4 to 5 million in the , are chronically infected with  and 4 million new infections occur every year [2,3]. n the developed world,  accounts for two-thirds of all cases of liver cancer and transplants [4], and in the , approximately 12,000 people are estimated to die from  each year [5].
he introduction of ± and the nucleoside analog ribavirin () greatly improved the percentage of chronically -infected patients able to reach a sustained antiviral response () [6,7]. et, the current standard ylated ± plus  (p. IFNΞ±/RBV) therapy has a low success rate of approximately 50% in patients with genotype 1 HCV [8,9] and can be associated with significant side effects [10]. Not only is genotype 1 the most prevalent HCV genotype in Europe, North and South America, China and Japan, it is also the most difficult to treat [11]. Thus, there is an urgent need for the development of additional anti-HCV agents with novel mechanisms of antiviral action in order to provide alternate treatments for the increasing number of patients who are unresponsive to the current pIFNΞ±/RBV treatment [2,12].
The availability of assays, which permit the identification of new anti-HCV agents, is limited. Two main assays were developed for the precise quantification of HCV replicon replication and for the discovery of antivirals: a real-time RT-PCR assay and a luciferase-based reporter assay [13,14]. Although these systems have proven to be vital in understanding many aspects of HCV replication, their main disadvantage is cost, both RT-PCR and luciferase reagents are expensive. In this study, we developed a rapid, sensitive and reproducible flow cytometry-based assay, which permits the identification of new anti-HCV agents in live cells in a quantitative manner to complement the existing HCV replicon replication assays currently available.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
2  
2.1 ssay evelopment ummary. To develop this assay, we generated a stable hepatoma cell line harboring a fluorescent Con1 subgenomic replicon Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP. This stable cell line was treated with a panel of anti-HCV compounds and viral replication was measured via FACS analysis between a period of 24-96 hrs.2.2PlasmidThe Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP vector was established by the insertion of the yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) into the C-terminus of the NS5A gene (MVSKGEELF-YFP-TLGMDE LYK) via homologous recombination using the In-Fusion HD Cloning kit (Clontech). Specifically, we inserted the yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) in the C-terminal region of NS5A in the HCV Luc-Con1 genome (pFKI389Luc-Ubineo/NS3-3'/ET) (Fig. 1A) in the same way the green fluorescent protein (GFP) had previously been inserted into the NS5A gene [15-18]. The resulting plasmid was called Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP.2.3Cell LineThe Huh 7.5.1 Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP stable cell line was achieved via electroporation of Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP RNA into the Huh 7.5.1 hepatoma cell line. In brief, RNA was synthesized from SpeI linearized Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP DNA using the T7 MEGAscript kit (Ambion), 4x106 Huh 7.5.1 cells were electroporated with 10ΞΌg of RNA and G-418 selected (50ΞΌg/ml) for 3 weeks. Huh 7.5.1 Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP cells were enriched using the BD FACS Aria sorter (Fig. 1B).2.4FACS Analysis500,000 Huh 7.5.1 Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP cells were seeded, HCV inhibitors were added one day post-seeding and replication was analyzed via FACS 1, 2, 3 and 4 days post-drug treatment. Cells were trypsonized, washed twice with PBS1X, and resuspended in 500ΞΌl of Sorting Buffer (PBS1X supplemented with 1mM EDTA, 25mM HEPES pH 7.0, and 1% FBS). FACS analysis was performed using the BDβ„Ά LSR II Flow Cytometer System and FACSDiva software. Gates for the FITC-A and Pacific Blue channels were set using parental Huh 7.5.1 cells as negative control and YFP expression was measured within the FITC-A positive gate. Results were all normalized to DMSO controls.2.5Luciferase100,000 Huh 7.5.1 Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP cells were seeded, HCV inhibitors were added one day post-seeding and replication was analyzed via luciferase activity 1-3 days post-drug treatment. Cells were washed twice with PBS1X, and lysed in 100ΞΌl of cell culture lysis reagent (Promega). 30ΞΌl of each lysate were used for the analysis and all results were normalized to DMSO controls.2.6Confocal AnalysisLive Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP Huh-7.5.1 cells were fixed in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde. Cells were examined with a Zeiss LSM 710 laser scanning confocal microscope using 63x objective with the 488nm laser to detect NS5A YFP, nuclei were visualized using DAPI staining. Images were analyzed using the Zeiss Zen software.2.7ImmunoblottingCellular lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred 1 hr onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PDVF) membranes at 100V. Membranes were blocked with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 10% milk for 1 hr and then incubated with the corresponding primary antibody diluted in TBSβ€“5% milkβ€“0.05% Tween 20 (antibody dilution buffer). NS5A-YFP was detected with anti-GFP polyclonal IgG (1/1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), NS5B with anti-NS5B monoclonal IgG (1/1000, Enzo Life Sciences), CypA with anti-CypA polyclonal IgG (1/1000, [19]), CypB with anti-CypB mAb (1/1000, Zymed Laboratories) and calnexin with anti-calnexin polyclonal IgG (1/5000, Sigma Life Sciences).
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
3
e found that both uc-on1 and uc-on1-5- cell lines efficiently replicated the viral genome as demonstrated by high and sustained luciferase levels over a period of one month and behaved in nearly identical manners when titrated with lisporivir (ig. 1, ). his further suggests that the  insertion into the 5 gene does not significantly alter the replication of the replicon. econd, we used confocal microscopy to analyze the expression of the 5- protein in cells harboring the uc-on1-5- replicon. he  fluorescence signal was found in the cytoplasm as bright dots in a reticular staining pattern that surrounds the nucleus that likely represents the endoplasmic reticulum () compartment (ig. 1). his pattern is similar to the distribution of  nonstructural proteins in uh-7 cells harboring subgenomic  replicons, as determined by immunofluorescence microscopy [20]. aken together, the similarity of size, distribution, and morphology of the dot-like  structures identified here with those previously identified as   replication complexes, strongly suggests that the 5- fusion protein is incorporated into such complexes.
e then assessed whether the established uc-on1-5- replicon cell line permits the screening of antiviral agents. e selected a panel of anti- compounds including direct-acting () and host-targeting antivirals (). s , we chose the recently -approved protease inhibitor telaprevir [21,22] and the potent investigational 5 inhibitor, -790052, which is currently in phase  studies [23]. s  agents, we chose cyclophilin inhibitors such as cyclosporine  (s. A) [24], two non-immunosuppressive CsA analogs: Alisporivir [25] and SCY-635 [26] as well as sanglifehrin A (SfA) and one SfA analog: BC544 [27]. Alisporivir and SCY-635 are currently being tested for safety and efficacy in phase III and II studies, respectively, whilst BC544 is in preclinical development.
Efficacy of the selected compounds was first examined by luciferase production in lysates of Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP replicon cells 3 days post-drug exposure. The 50% effective concentrations (EC50) for inhibition of Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP replication in Huh-7.5.1 cells by telaprevir, BMS-790052, CsA, Alisporivir, SCY-635, SfA, BC544 and BC556 were 8.1 Β±Β 1.4, 1.4 Β± 0.2, 311 Β±Β 23, 7.9 Β± 0.4, 8.2 Β± 1.1, 288 Β± 33, 6.1 Β± 1.2 and 5.4 Β± 0.6 nM, respectively (Table 1). Except for CsA, a majority of the drugs exhibit low cytotoxicity (CC50 >10 ΒµM) (Table 1). After verifying high antiviral activities of the selected compounds using luciferase as the reporter gene, we examined their potency using NS5A-YFP as the reporter gene by flow cytometry. Stable Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP replicon cells were exposed to control (DMSO) or selected drugs and analyzed by FACS for YFP content. Parental Huh-7.5.1 cells express minimal autofluorescence (0.3%), whereas Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP cells exhibit a strong YFP signal (81.2%). All drugs when used at a concentration of 2ΞΌM and their antiviral activity assessed between a 24-96 hr period reduced the percentage of YFP+ cells, indicating that they efficiently block HCV RNA replication. Specifically, at the 72hr time point the percentage of YFP+ cells was reduced from 81.2% to 1.22% for telaprevir, 2.42% for BMS-790052, 3.94% for CsA, 5.3% for Alisporivir, 1.77% for SCY-635, 33.5% for SfA, and 9.36% for BC544 (Fig. 2A). There is thus a direct correlation for antiviral potency as measured by luciferase in cell lysates and YFP fluorescence in live cells.
Kinetic studies indicate that the percentage of YFP+ cells 2 days post-drug exposure is already reduced (Fig. 2B), but 3 days post-drug treatment, all compounds, except SfA, dramatically reduced the YFP fluorescence signal (Fig. 2B), demonstrating the high potency of the selected compounds. Results were unchanged 4 days post-drug treatment (Fig. 2B), suggesting that the inhibitory action of the selected antivirals reaches a maximal effect after 3 days. Titration studies using the cyclophilin inhibitor Alisporivir as an antiviral prototype demonstrate that the flow cytometry-based live cell assay represents a useful tool to quantitatively screen HCV inhibitors (Fig. 2C). We verified the FACS results (Fig. 2B) by confocal analysis. Exposure of Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP cells to cyclophilin inhibitors such as Alisporivir and SCY-635 totally abolished the YFP fluorescence signal compared to the control (Fig. 2D). We also verified the block of viral replication by examining HCV protein levels in Luc-Con1-NS5A-YFP cells by Western blotting. NS5A-YFP levels were profoundly reduced 2 and 3 days post-drug treatment (Fig. 2E). Similar results were obtained for NS5B (Fig. 2E). Interestingly, an NS5B signal was still detectable three days post-SfA treatment (Fig. 2E), correlating well with residual YFP levels detected by flow cytometry in SfA-treated live cells (Fig. 2B). Similar levels of calnexin and cyclophilin A (CypA) indicate that similar levels of proteins were analyzed (Fig. 2E). Intracellular cyclophilin B (CypB) levels were dramatically reduced in Huh-7.5.1 cells treated with all cyclophilin inhibitors (CsA, Alisporivir, SCY-635, SfA or BC544), but not with non-cyclophilin inhibitors (telaprevir and BMS-790052) (Fig. 2E). These data are in accordance with previous findings including ours that cyclophilin inhibitors such as CsA and Alisporivir, by binding to the enzymatic hydrophobic pocket of CypB, trigger the release of CypB from the ER into the extracellular medium [29,30].
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
4
n this study, we established a flow cytometry live cell-based assay that permits a rapid and sensitive screening of  inhibitors. pecifically, we created a stable cell line, which harbors a subgenomic replicon encoding an 5- fusion protein. his system allows direct and sensitive measure of  fluorescence in live hepatoma cells, which support autonomous viral  replication and viral protein expression from the  replicon. mportantly, this flow cytometry system is not only fast, but it also exhibits an extremely low variability between assays. urthermore, we demonstrated that this stable fluorescent system permits the precise quantification of  replication inhibition by mechanistically distinct classes of inhibitors including direct-acting () and host-targeting antiviral () agents. n conclusion, this flow cytometry live cell-based assay is well suited for multiple applications including the evaluation of  replication and anti- drug screening.4DISCUSSION
In this study, we established a flow cytometry live cell-based assay that permits a rapid and sensitive screening of HCV inhibitors. Specifically, we created a stable cell line, which harbors a subgenomic replicon encoding an NS5A-YFP fusion protein. This system allows direct and sensitive measure of YFP fluorescence in live hepatoma cells, which support autonomous viral RNA replication and viral protein expression from the HCV replicon. Importantly, this flow cytometry system is not only fast, but it also exhibits an extremely low variability between assays. Furthermore, we demonstrated that this stable fluorescent system permits the precise quantification of HCV replication inhibition by mechanistically distinct classes of inhibitors including direct-acting (DAA) and host-targeting antiviral (HTA) agents. In conclusion, this flow cytometry live cell-based assay is well suited for multiple applications including the evaluation of HCV replication and anti-HCV drug screening.
</sections.3>

</text>
