<title>
Molecular characterization of a patient presumed to have prader-willi syndrome.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is caused by the loss of RNA expression from an imprinted region on chromosome 15 that includes SNRPN, SNORD115, and SNORD116. Currently, there are no mouse models that faithfully reflect the human phenotype and investigations rely on human post-mortem material. During molecular characterization of tissue deposited in a public brain bank from a patient diagnosed with Prader-Willi syndrome, we found RNA expression from SNRPN, SNORD115, and SNORD116 which does not support a genetic diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome. The patient was a female, Caucasian nursing home resident with history of morbid obesity (BMI 56.3) and mental retardation. She died at age of 56 from pulmonary embolism. SNORD115 and SNORD116 are unexpectedly stable in post mortem tissue and can be used for post-mortem diagnosis. Molecular characterization of PWS tissue donors can confirm the diagnosis and identify those patients that have been misdiagnosed.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
rader-illi syndrome () is a congenital disease caused by the loss of  expression from an imprinted region on chromosome 15. his region is expressed only from the paternally inherited allele. atients with  typically undergo several stages beginning as infants when they are characterized by severe infantile hypotonia with poor suck and failure to thrive. his stage is followed by early childhood onset obesity and hyperphagia. he patients exhibit developmental delay and/or mild intellectual disability. ther features include short stature, hypogonadism, thick saliva, obsessive-compulsive behavior, and hormonal imbalances.1,2
ecently, several patients with rader-illi-like phenotypes have been described (ig. 1). hese patients had microdeletions affecting two clusters of small nucleolar s (sno. RNAs), SNORD115 and SNORD116. This indicates that the loss of snoRNAs plays a central role in the etiology of the disease (Fig. 1A).3–5
The molecular mechanisms that link the loss of two clusters of snoRNAs to the disease are currently under investigation. Loss of SNORD115 could explain hyperphagia observed in PWS patients, as SNORD115 has been shown to regulate alternative splicing of the serotonin receptor 2C. SNORD115 helps to generate the most active form of the receptor.6–8 No molecular mechanisms have been established thus far demonstrating the role of SNORD116 in the generation of PWS. It is known, however, that SNORD116 influences the expression of microRNAs hosted in the second exon of the serotonin receptor 2C.9
SNORD115 and SNORD116 do not express canonical C/D box snoRNAs, but are likely processed into shorter RNAs, termed psnoRNAs,10,11 that do not associate with the proteins typically found in C/D box snoRNAs.10,12 Canonical C/D box snoRNAs function in 2′-O-methylation of non-coding RNAs and form a defined ribonuclear complex with the proteins fibrillarin, NOP56/58 and 15.5 kD (NHP2L1).
Currently, there are no mouse models available that faithfully replicate the human phenotype13 and molecular investigations rely on human material. Since SNORD115 is exclusively, and SNORD116 mainly, expressed in the brain, tissue deposited in brain banks is crucial for molecular analysis aimed to find the cause of the disease.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Case resentation
atient 4876 was clinically diagnosed with  and lived in group housing. he patient’s cause of death was pulmonary embolism at the age of 56 years (year of birth 1950). he was described as morbidly obese with a weight of 140 kg (308 lbs) and height of 157.5 cm (5 ft, 2 in) with a body mass index () of 56.3. he had a life long history of learning difficulties, carrying a diagnosis of mental retardation. he was reported to have an insatiable appetite, continually seeking food. n one occasion, she ingested 5 lbs of raw hamburger meat. t was necessary to lock food sources and as such, the refrigerator had a chain and lock on it. he threw extreme temper tantrums when she was denied food. edical records are sparse, but she was reported to suffer from anxiety and have frequent falls. he frequent falls may have been due to low muscle tone and decreased muscle mass that is described in . dditionally, the anxiety may have contributed to her behavior problems and are usually described in  patients. his patient also had bstructive leep pnea () with chronic 2 retention, also described in  patients. orbid obesity is also associated with , however,  patients have a low muscle tone in addition to obesity that increases odds for . hese described clinical features led to the diagnosis of  for this patient. his diagnosis was based on clinical criteria since, at the time, routine diagnostic tests were not available.
he brain was removed after a post mortem interval of 41 hrs and showed no gross abnormalities. icroscopic examination showed gliosis and deposition of dark granular material in the cerebral cortical molecular layer and in the midbrain. here were no observable neurofibrillary tangles, senile plaques, or ewy bodies. here was multifocal leptomeningeal fibrosis. he dentate gyrus showed focal thinning and dispersion of neurons, some of which showed degenerative features. here was loss of urkinje cells and ergmann’s gliosis. he patient’s medical history included depression, mental retardation, morbid obesity, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, history of falls, chronic 2 retention secondary to obesity, hypercholesterolemia, recent urinary tract infections, and meningioma. dditional family history was obtained following the current genetic analysis. he donor had two sisters with the same phenotype, one of whom is deceased.Case Presentation
Patient 4876 was clinically diagnosed with PWS and lived in group housing. The patient’s cause of death was pulmonary embolism at the age of 56 years (year of birth 1950). She was described as morbidly obese with a weight of 140 kg (308 lbs) and height of 157.5 cm (5 ft, 2 in) with a body mass index (BMI) of 56.3. She had a life long history of learning difficulties, carrying a diagnosis of mental retardation. She was reported to have an insatiable appetite, continually seeking food. On one occasion, she ingested 5 lbs of raw hamburger meat. It was necessary to lock food sources and as such, the refrigerator had a chain and lock on it. She threw extreme temper tantrums when she was denied food. Medical records are sparse, but she was reported to suffer from anxiety and have frequent falls. The frequent falls may have been due to low muscle tone and decreased muscle mass that is described in PWS. Additionally, the anxiety may have contributed to her behavior problems and are usually described in PWS patients. This patient also had Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) with chronic CO2 retention, also described in PWS patients. Morbid obesity is also associated with OSA, however, PWS patients have a low muscle tone in addition to obesity that increases odds for OSA. These described clinical features led to the diagnosis of PWS for this patient. This diagnosis was based on clinical criteria since, at the time, routine diagnostic tests were not available.
The brain was removed after a post mortem interval of 41 hrs and showed no gross abnormalities. Microscopic examination showed gliosis and deposition of dark granular material in the cerebral cortical molecular layer and in the midbrain. There were no observable neurofibrillary tangles, senile plaques, or Lewy bodies. There was multifocal leptomeningeal fibrosis. The dentate gyrus showed focal thinning and dispersion of neurons, some of which showed degenerative features. There was loss of Purkinje cells and Bergmann’s gliosis. The patient’s medical history included depression, mental retardation, morbid obesity, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, history of falls, chronic CO2 retention secondary to obesity, hypercholesterolemia, recent urinary tract infections, and meningioma. Additional family history was obtained following the current genetic analysis. The donor had two sisters with the same phenotype, one of whom is deceased.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Post-ortem enetic valuation
he brain of patient 4876 was donated to the  rain and issue ank (altimore, ). e analyzed  from frontal cortex by ase protection analysis. s a probe, we used a uniformly radiolabeled riboprobe against chr15: 25, 318, 253-25, 318, 349 for 115 and chr15: 25, 494, 345-25, 494, 426 for 116 in g19 for 115 and chr15: 25, 494, 345-25, 494, 426 for 116. he ase protections were performed as previously described.14  was isolated from brain using easy ipid issue it (iagen, ilden) according to manufactory protocol.  expressing constructs to make ase protection probes are available through ddgene (ambridge ).
s controls, we used  obtained from non rader-illi subject tissues from the  brain bank (able 1).
s shown in igure 1, patient 4876 expressed 115 and 116 to the same degree as the controls. erforming an ase protection assay with the ubiquitously expressed 2 sno. RNA showed approximately equal loading in each lane (Fig. 1C).
Next, the expression of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide N (SNRPN) that hosts SNORD115 and SNORD116 in their 3′ UTR was analyzed (Fig. 2). We amplified the SNRPN cDNA using primers h_SNRPN-F ggactcccatcaagtctcca h (to exon #4) SNRPN-R tggctttaaccacctcttgg (to exon #5). Again, there was expression of SNRPN in patient 4876, but not in PWS controls.
Quantitative (q) RT-PCR was conducted for each of the brain tissue samples using 400 ng of total RNA, with a net final RNA concentration per reaction of 20 ng/μl. Then, 2.5 μl of the cDNA product (approximately 50 ng of cDNA) was used for quantitative PCR (qPCR) using TaqMan Probes directed at the SNORD116 (custom probe) and SNRPN (Applied Biosystems) target sites. A GAPDH TaqMan Probe (Applied Biosystems) was used as loading control. As shown in Figure 1D, patient 4876 had expression at SNRPN that was more than any of the 3 control brain samples and a very robust expression at SNORD116. In contrast, the two PWS samples (4805 and 5324) had basically no expression at SNRPN and SNORD116.
DNA methylation analysis using Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) can be used to diagnose individuals with PWS.1 We used 100 ng of DNA for each of the brain tissue samples, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (MRC Holland; Amsterdam, Netherlands). Our analysis showed that patient 4876 had approximately 57% DNA methylation at MKRN3, which would be typical for a normal control individual and was within the range of 3 control brain samples15 (Table 2). DNA methylation analysis at the SNRPN locus could not be determined due to DNA degradation from the aged brain sample.
Finally, we performed Affymetrix exon junction array analysis using posterior hypothalamic RNA. We compared genome wide gene expression of patient 4876, with the two molecularly confirmed PWS patients 5324 and 4805, as well as the controls (5238, 4782, and 1539) (Table 1). For the analysis, the mean values in the control and PWS groups were compared with the values obtained for patient 4876. The array analysis is shown in the supplementary files 1 and 2 as excel spreadsheets.
The most distinct difference between 4876 and the two PWS samples were RNAs expressed from the PWS critical region on chromosome 15 that showed more than a 20 fold change. This finding is supported by RNase protection of SNORD115 and SNORD116, as well as the RT-PCR analysis of SNRPN. Overall we observed 7,190 changes between patient 4876 and PWS subjects.
The comparison between 4876 and control patients resulted in 18,050 changes with a significant change in expression. The high number of changes in both experiments likely indicates differences between individuals, rather than differences due to brain pathology. However, the RNA from posterior hypothalamus of patient 4876 was more similar to PWS subjects than to the control, as indicated by the lower numbers of fold changes.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Conclusion
atient 4876 was diagnosed with  because of typical clinical demonstrations such as hyperphagia, morbid obesity, short statue, low muscle tone, sleep apnea, and mental retardation. o modern genetic analysis has been performed while the patient was alive. owever, our post-mortem molecular genetic analyses eliminate  as a diagnosis. ur genetic analysis is based on the copy number of genes in the genetic region causing the disease as well as expression of 115 and 116 sno. RNAs. Due to the long post mortem interval of 41 hrs, the DNA was damaged and did not yield complete DNA methylation results for all genes of the PWS critical region. Similarly, the RNA was degraded with an RNA integrity number (RIN) of 2.3 for patient 4876.
The low RIN indicates a relatively high level of degradation of ribosomal RNAs, as RIN quantification relies on ratio of long ribosomal RNA and short RNAs. snoRNAs appear to be fairly stable, as we could detect them using RNase protection analysis and qRT-PCR in RNA with a high degree of degradation. This could be due to posttranscriptional modifications or their small size. In contrast to qPCR, RNase protection analysis can discriminate between related copies of SNORD115 and SNORD116. In addition the technique allows absolute quantification of RNA and can be performed using commercially available kits. Thus using RNase protection and qRT-PCR, SNORD115 and SNORD116 can be detected in post-mortem tissue.
A genome wide array analysis showed that in terms of RNA expression, patient 4876 was more similar to PWS subjects than the genetically normal controls. This similarity reflects the clinical phenotype where patient 4876 was clinically similar to PWS resulting in misdiagnosis. Due to the small sample number, which is an intrinsic problem of using post-mortem tissue of a rare disease, we cannot make statistically supported analyses. However, the data suggest that some obesity syndromes have similarities with PWS, although the basic molecular defect is clearly different.
Our findings point out that diagnosis of patients based on clinical phenotype may result in misdiagnosis. Although clinical records are necessary and helpful, genetic analysis of tissues donated for research should be performed when feasible.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Supplementary iles
upplementary ile 1. xcel spread sheet showing the comparison between patient 4876 and two  patients.upplementary ile 2. xcel spread sheet showing the comparison between patient 4876 and three control subjects.upplementary ile 3. istances heat map of gene expression of patient 4876,  patients, and normal subjects.Supplementary Files
Supplementary File 1. Excel spread sheet showing the comparison between patient 4876 and two PWS patients.Supplementary File 2. Excel spread sheet showing the comparison between patient 4876 and three control subjects.Supplementary File 3. Distances heat map of gene expression of patient 4876, PWS patients, and normal subjects.
</sections.4>

</text>
