<title>
A Notch updated.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Cell-cell signaling mediated by the Notch receptor is iteratively involved in numerous developmental contexts, and its dysregulation has been associated with inherited genetic disorders and cancers. The core components of the signaling pathway have been identified for some time, but the study of the modulation of the pathway in different cellular contexts has revealed many layers of regulation. These include complex sugar modifications in the extracellular domain as well as transit of Notch through defined cellular compartments, including specific endosomes.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Notch signaling is an evolutionary conserved signaling pathway that is involved in a wide variety of developmental processes, including adult homeostasis and stem cell maintenance (rtavanis-sakonas et al., 1999; ai, 2004; e orgne et al., 2005a; ray, 2006). oss of function of components of this pathway causes inherited genetic diseases such as lagille syndrome, spondylocostal dysostosis (), and cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (; ridley, 2003), whereas up-regulation of otch activity has been associated with  cell acute lymphatic leukemia (-; undt et al., 2008). ignaling occurs when the ligands  (elta, errate, ag2) bind and interact with otch, thereby inducing a series of cleavages named 2, 3, and 4 (ig. 1). he 2 cleavage is mediated by / metalloproteases (rou et al., 2000; ieber et al., 2002), whereas the 3/4 cleavage is an intramembranous cleavage mediated by the presenilin-dependent ³-secretase (e trooper et al., 1999; truhl and reenwald, 1999; kochi et al., 2002), resulting in the translocation of the intracellular domain of otch () into the nucleus. uclear  then interacts with a transcriptional factor  (1/k in mammals, u() in flies, and -1 in worms) to activate downstream target genes (rtavanis-sakonas et al., 1999; ai, 2004; e orgne et al., 2005a; ray, 2006). n mammals, there are four otch proteins (otch 1β€“4), three elta-like proteins (ll 1, 2 and 4), and two agged proteins (errate in fly). oth the elta-like and agged proteins have a  domain and  repeats. n addition, agged proteins have a cysteine-rich domain (iyota and inoshita, 2002). he otch protein consists of an extracellular domain () with 36  domains, a heterodimer domain (), and three  (in-12, otch repeats) domains, followed by transmembrane domain, ankyrin repeats, and a  motif (ig. 1 ). hese domains of otch provide a platform for modifications and specific regulatory events.Notch signaling is an evolutionary conserved signaling pathway that is involved in a wide variety of developmental processes, including adult homeostasis and stem cell maintenance (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1999; Lai, 2004; Le Borgne et al., 2005a; Bray, 2006). Loss of function of components of this pathway causes inherited genetic diseases such as Alagille syndrome, spondylocostal dysostosis (SCD), and cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL; Gridley, 2003), whereas up-regulation of Notch activity has been associated with T cell acute lymphatic leukemia (T-ALL; Jundt et al., 2008). Signaling occurs when the ligands DSL (Delta, Serrate, Lag2) bind and interact with Notch, thereby inducing a series of cleavages named S2, S3, and S4 (Fig. 1). The S2 cleavage is mediated by ADAM/TACE metalloproteases (Brou et al., 2000; Lieber et al., 2002), whereas the S3/4 cleavage is an intramembranous cleavage mediated by the presenilin-dependent Ξ³-secretase (De Strooper et al., 1999; Struhl and Greenwald, 1999; Okochi et al., 2002), resulting in the translocation of the intracellular domain of Notch (NICD) into the nucleus. Nuclear NICD then interacts with a transcriptional factor CSL (CBF1/RBPJk in mammals, Su(H) in flies, and LAG-1 in worms) to activate downstream target genes (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 1999; Lai, 2004; Le Borgne et al., 2005a; Bray, 2006). In mammals, there are four Notch proteins (Notch 1β€“4), three Delta-like proteins (Dll 1, 2 and 4), and two Jagged proteins (Serrate in fly). Both the Delta-like and Jagged proteins have a DSL domain and EGF repeats. In addition, Jagged proteins have a cysteine-rich domain (Kiyota and Kinoshita, 2002). The Notch protein consists of an extracellular domain (ECD) with 36 EGF domains, a heterodimer domain (HD), and three LNR (Lin-12, Notch repeats) domains, followed by transmembrane domain, ankyrin repeats, and a PEST motif (Fig. 1 A). These domains of Notch provide a platform for modifications and specific regulatory events.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Notch signaling is an unusual signaling pathway, whose activity does not rely on secondary messengers for amplification. ather, otch signaling is modulated by glycosylation, differential intracellular trafficking, and ubiquitin-dependent degradation. n this review, we will discuss current findings related to the tuning of otch activity at three different levels: the glycosylation events and their impact on otch; the cleavage events required for ligand-dependent otch activation and the mechanisms to prevent ligand-independent activation; and, finally, endosomal trafficking of otch to regulate protein sorting, recycling, and degradation. he regulation of the  ligands through endocytosis has been recently summarized in other reviews (e orgne et al., 2005a; ichols et al., 2007; β€™ouza et al., 2008).Notch signaling is an unusual signaling pathway, whose activity does not rely on secondary messengers for amplification. Rather, Notch signaling is modulated by glycosylation, differential intracellular trafficking, and ubiquitin-dependent degradation. In this review, we will discuss current findings related to the tuning of Notch activity at three different levels: the glycosylation events and their impact on Notch; the cleavage events required for ligand-dependent Notch activation and the mechanisms to prevent ligand-independent activation; and, finally, endosomal trafficking of Notch to regulate protein sorting, recycling, and degradation. The regulation of the DSL ligands through endocytosis has been recently summarized in other reviews (Le Borgne et al., 2005a; Nichols et al., 2007; Dβ€™Souza et al., 2008).
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
The disulfide bonds and glycosylation events influence otch activity
he  of otch modulates the ligand-dependent signaling potential of otch, and some of the current research on the  can be divided into two main topics: (1) ligand binding and glycosylation, and (2) negative regulation of otch signaling via the three s and . inding of otch to its  ligands was first demonstrated by their ability to cause aggregation of rosophila melanogaster 2 cells (ebay et al., 1991). ased on deletion analyses and aggregation assays,  repeats 11β€“12 in otch were shown to be necessary and sufficient to mediate  binding (ig. 1). ore recent studies invoke the help of  repeats 5β€“9 and 25β€“36 for this receptorβ€“ligand interaction (u et al., 2005). he -like domain contains six characteristic cysteine residues that form three pairs of disulfide bonds (leming, 1998). he structural role of disulfide bonds in  repeats of otch has been further highlighted because a human disease known as  has been associated with impaired disulfide bond formation in the  repeat of the 3 protein (outel et al., 1996; ridley, 2003).  is an inherited dominant disease that is often associated with arteriopathy, subcortical ischemic strokes, and disability due to impairment in vascular smooth muscle function (ournier-asserve et al., 1991). ost  patients have either a gain or a loss of 1β€“3 cysteine residues in the  repeats of 3 (outel et al., 1996), resulting in a gain or a loss of specific disulfide bonds. owever recent studies have uncovered rare 3 mutations that do not seem to involve cysteine residues in patients with -like symptoms (izuno et al., 2008). lthough many mutations have been documented, the molecular mechanism underlying the disease is poorly defined, and there is a debate as to whether  results from aberrant otch signaling or protein accumulation (for reviews see pinner, 2000; ryxell et al., 2001).
n flies, there are a set of otch mutations known as bruptex alleles that are semidominant and are also associated with a gain or a loss of disulfide bond formation (elley et al., 1987; de elis and arcia-ellido, 1994; ryxell et al., 2001). lies with bruptex alleles often exhibit loss of wing veins and loss of bristles, phenotypes often associated with a gain of function of otch activity (de elis and arcia-ellido, 1994). ow these alleles result in a hyperactivity of otch is still under investigation. he mutations in the bruptex alleles have been mapped to the  repeats 24β€“29 of otch (artley et al., 1987; elley et al., 1987; de elis and ray, 2000). nterestingly, it has been recently shown that  22β€“27 binds to the  11β€“14 (ei and aker, 2008). ecause  11β€“14 can bind to both the ligands and  22β€“27 intramolecularly, it is reasonable to suggest that  22β€“27 normally interferes and competes with ligand binding, providing an added layer of regulation (ei and aker, 2008). oth  and the bruptex alleles are specifically caused by unpaired cysteines within the  repeats of otch. ence, it has been suggested that . melanogaster bruptex mutations may serve as a model for studying  (for review see ryxell et al., 2001), though this link needs to be interpreted with caution (for review see ouvi et al., 2006). ased on gain-of-function () phenotypes observed in bruptex mutants, it is tempting to speculate that  mutations in human 3 might result in a similar gain of function of 3. his hypothesis still awaits experimental validation.
he otch extracellular domain () is heavily glycosylated, and the biological consequences of these modifications are slowly being unraveled.  repeats with the 2-4-5-/-3 (aines and rvine, 2003) consensus sequence can be modified by -fucosyltransferase, which adds fucose to the serine or threonine site. he -fucose site of  can be further modified with -glycans mediated by a ²1, 3--acetylglucosaminyltransferase, ringe (ruckner et al., 2000; u et al., 2000). uring fly wing development, loss-of-function analyses of ringe indicate that the sugar modification activity of ringe promotes otchβ€™s ability to bind elta and negatively affects its interaction with errate (anin et al., 1997). his finding is further strengthened by biochemical assays showing that ringe-modified otch exhibits higher binding affinity for elta than errate (ei et al., 2003). n addition, an evolutionary conserved -fucose site at the otch  repeat 12 contributes to decreasing the otchβ€“ligand interaction in both flies and mice (ei et al., 2003; e and tanley, 2008). n flies, a otch protein with a mutation at this -fucose site is ectopically activated by errate and overrides the regulation of ringe in vivo, and this mutant also binds errate efficiently in biochemical assays in the presence of ringe (ei et al., 2003). urthermore, a specific knockin mouse carrying an -fucose mutant in otch1  repeat 12 (otch112f) has been created (e and tanley, 2008). ransheterozygous mice carrying a otch112f allele and a otch1 null allele exhibit embryonic lethality and defects similar to otch1 homozygous null embryos. owever, homozygous otch112f mice are viable with defects in  cell specification and functions. mportantly, thymocytes from these mutant mice show decreased binding capacity to elta1-expressing cells. (e and tanley, 2008). n addition, because other  repeats promote otchβ€“ligand interaction, other -fucosylation sites on  repeats 26 and 27 have been reported to modulate the binding affinity of otch for its ligands (u et al., 2005). t is thought that -fucosylation of multiple s may affect the local folding of s and contribute to ligand binding. n addition to ringe-dependent glycosylation, modifications by other glycosyltransferases after adding the -glycan at the -fucose sites have been identified (oloney et al., 2000). owever, in vitro purified otch without these modifications is still able to bind their ligands very efficiently (u et al., 2007), which suggests that these modifications contribute minimally to modulating otchβ€“ligand interaction.
he role of -fucosylation and ringe proteins in mammals is less well defined and seems to contradict to some extent the data acquired in flies. hree mammalian fringes have been identified: unatic fringe (fng), adical fringe (fng), and anic fringe (fng; oran et al., 1999). t has been suggested that ringe proteins can either affect the binding affinity between otch and its ligands or enhance 2 cleavage of otch (ang et al., 2005). lthough the three ringe homologues are capable of carrying out glycosylation reactions (ampal et al., 2005), a role of fng has only been clearly demonstrated in somitogenesis (vrard et al., 1998; hang and ridley, 1998) and  cell formation (isan et al., 2006). nterestingly, and contrary to the fly data, experiments in mammals indicate that fng inhibits the eltaβ€“otch interaction during somitogensis (ale et al., 2003; orimoto et al., 2005). oreover, the knockout of rfng displays no obvious phenotype (hang et al., 2002), and a knockout of mfng has yet to be documented. owever, mutations in  have been identified in patients with s (parrow et al., 2006), a disease associated with vertebral segmentation defects. he other genes associated with s are ll3 and 2, a b. HLH protein regulating somitogenesis by inducing the expression of Lfng (Morimoto et al., 2005).
Given the important role of Fringe-dependent glycosylation of Notch, the enzyme mediating the O-fucosylation of the O-fucose sites in the EGF repeats must play a role before the action of Fringe. This enzymatic property has been shown in biochemical assays to be mediated by O-fucosyltransferase (O-fut1 in mammals and Ofut1 in flies). Flies and mice with a loss of function of O-fut1 exhibit severe Notch-related defects (Okajima et al., 2003; Shi and Stanley, 2003), providing strong evidence that O-fut1 is indeed involved in modulating Notch activity. Because only the O-fucose sites of Notch are further modified by Fringe, one would assume that O-fucosylation is only required for Fringe-dependent processes. However, Ofut1 has recently been shown to have other functions that are independent of its enzymatic activity (Okajima et al., 2005, 2008; Sasamura et al., 2007). In flies, the nonenzymatic functions of Ofut1 have been reported to affect folding of Notch in the ER (Okajima et al., 2005), and Ofut1 has also been proposed to have an extracellular function that modulates Notch endosomal trafficking (Sasamura et al., 2007). In Ofut1-deficient fly cells, the majority of Notch is misfolded and trapped in the ER, which suggests that Ofut1 is required for Notch folding. Interestingly, this phenotype can be rescued by overexpressing the enzymatically inactive form of the fucosyltranferase Ofut1R275A (Okajima et al., 2005, 2008), which indicates that Ofut1 functions as a chaperone of Notch. However, this enzymatic defective Ofut1 does not rescue the wing defects typically associated with loss of fringe. Hence, the chaperone activity is required for both Fringe-dependent and -independent processes of Notch and plays a crucial role in the quality control of Notch in the ER. Sasamura et al. (2007) have also proposed an extracellular function for Ofut1. However, the fact that Ofut is required in a cell-autonomous fashion and the data presented by Okajima et al. (2008) indicate that a chaperone function for Ofut1 is quite likely. Interested readers are referred to a review by Vodovar and Schweisguth (2008).
In mammals, the precise role of O-fucosylation in Notch signaling remains to be understood: i.e., it is unknown if O-fut1 plays a role as a chaperone. Similar to flies that lack Ofut1, loss of O-fut1 in mice leads to embryonic lethality and causes numerous developmental defects similar to those that have been described in CBF1 (the downstream transcription factor of Notch, named Su(H) in flies)-deficient mice; Shi and Stanley, 2003). Recent studies in embryonic stem cells in which O-fut1 was removed, and Chinese hamster ovary cell lines in which O-fut1 was knocked down, show that Notchβ€“ligand interaction and ligand-induced Notch activation are impaired in biochemical assays, highlighting the role of O-fucosylation in optimizing the Notchβ€“ligand binding (Stahl et al., 2008). However, in these mutant cells, the levels of Notch on the membrane are normal compared with the wild type, which suggests that mammalian O-fut1 may not be required for Notch folding (Stahl et al., 2008). Further analyses will be required to dissect the role of O-fucosylation in specific developmental contexts using conditional knockout techniques.
In addition to O-fucosylation, Notch is also modified by O-linked glucosylation. Although O-glucosylation of Notch had been established some time ago on the basis of biochemical assays (Moloney et al., 2000), the functional significance of this modification and the protein responsible for this modification were unknown until recently. The O-glucosyltransferase is encoded by the rumi gene in D. melanogaster (Acar et al., 2008). Rumi is an ER protein that adds glucose to residues in numerous Notch EGF repeats with the consensus C1-X-S-X-P-C2 sequence (Moloney et al., 2000). In rumi mutant flies, Notch signaling is severely affected at 28Β°C but only mildly at 18Β°C, which suggests that glucosylation of Notch is required at the restrictive temperature to either stabilize its folding or trafficking (Acar et al., 2008). Indeed, Notch trafficking seems to be impaired in cells that lack Rumi at the restrictive temperature, but Notch with impaired or no glucosyl residues still traffics to the cell membrane, where it seems to bind Delta properly on the basis of biochemical assays. However, the S2 cleavage of Notch is severely impaired based on a Western blotting assay. The precise mechanism as to why Notch accumulates at the membrane at the restrictive temperature and how the S2 cleavage is impaired remains to be established. In addition, although 18 EGFs can be potential targets for O-glucosylation, which glucosylation site within NECD is important to convey this temperature-sensitive phenotype remains unknown. There are three homologues of Rumi in mammals; however, their roles in Notch signaling remain unknown.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
The cleavage events required for ligand-dependent otch activation and the mechanisms to prevent ligand-independent activation
fter otch enters the olgi, it is cleaved by urin, a cleavage event that has been termed 1 cleavage (ogeat et al., 1998). lthough the 1 cleavage of otch can be observed in both fly and mammalian cell culture, whether it is essential for otch activity is still a matter of debate. n flies, the majority of otch protein does not undergo 1 cleavage, and mutations in furin 1 (10772) do not cause otch signaling defects (idd and ieber, 2002). owever, a second furin-like paralogue (furin 2 [18743]) exists in flies, and its function is unknown. ecause furin2 may play a redundant role with furin 1, a double mutant of both genes would be required to assess if 1 cleavage is indeed required in fly. n mammals, although small deletion mutants of otch removing the 1 cleavage site are defective in signal transduction, these mutants may not only affect 1 cleavage but also 2 cleavage. bviously, mutations affecting only the 1 cleavage site would be valuable for understanding its role in otch signaling.
otch is kept in an inactive state before ligand binding through a tight interaction between the s and the  (ig. 2, top). rom structural analyses, it appears that the 2 cleavage site in the  is embedded and protected by the three s (ordon et al., 2007). he current hypothesis is that the pulling force generated by endocytosis of the ligand would weaken the interaction between the s and the , thereby freeing the 2 cleavage and allowing access to the 2 site for the  proteases (ig. 2, bottom). nterestingly, in - patients, β�30% of the mutations in 1 have been mapped to the interface of s and the  (eng et al., 2004; ordon et al., 2007). hese mutations are thought to be  mutations causing a constitutive activation of otch signaling. owever, when these mutant proteins are overexpressed in mouse hematopoietic precursors, they fail to initiate leukemia on their own, although ectopic  cell development is observed (hiang et al., 2008). owever, these  alleles can accelerate the onset of leukemia initiation mediated by -ras overexpression, which suggests that cooperation of the activated otch and other oncogenes may underlie leukemia (hiang et al., 2008). lthough there are many mutations identified in the  region of 1 in - patients, only one mutation was identified in the  region (ansour et al., 2007), which suggests that there is a stringent control in the cell to monitor correct folding of s. his hypothesis is strengthened by recent findings on ro1 in the fly. ro1 is an -associated thiol oxidase required for disulfide bond formation. lthough it is presumably required for most if not all disulfide bond formation based on yeast data (u et al., 2000), the loss-of-function phenotypes of ro1 in flies indicate a role in lateral inhibition during peripheral nervous system development and inductive signaling during adult wing formation (ien et al., 2008), two hallmarks of otch-related developmental contexts. lthough both the  ligands and otch contain numerous disulfide bonds in their , ro1-deficient cells show a prominent accumulation of otch inside the  without affecting  localization and function, which suggests that the problem may lie in the s of otch. ote that the s are only found in otch in flies, although there are mammalian -containing proteins termed pregnancy-associated plasma protein- (-, pappalysin-1) and -2 (oldt et al., 2004), which have no homologues in . melanogaster. iochemical data further indicate that disulfide bonds in s of otch are targets of ro1 (ien et al., 2008). herefore, it is reasonable to suggest that a stringent control of disulfide bond formation of the s in the  ensures the proper folding of s (ien et al., 2008).
igure 2.-ray structure of the human 2 negative regulatory region () in its autoinhibited conformation, and models for signal activation. he top panel shows a ribbon representation of the 2 . he  modules are colored in different shades of pink and purple, and the  is in white and green. he three bound a2+ ions are shown in green, the bound n2+ ion is purple, and the disulfide bonds are red. he positions of 1 and 2 cleavage are indicated with red arrows. he bottom panel shows the model for activation by mechanical force driven by the  endocytosis. or unbound otch, the s (pink structure in 1β€“4) protect the 2 cleavage site in  (white structure in 1β€“4). hen otch binds to , which then undergoes endocytosis (1 and 2), this generates a mechanical force for disengaging s from the  (shown in 1β€“3). his relaxation between sβ€“ interaction allows the metalloprotease to access the 2 cleavage site (shown in 4), leading to otch activation. he figure is adapted from ordon et al. (2007, 2008).fter otch is cleaved by a metalloprotease at the 2 site, the otch external truncation () domain is ready to be cleaved by the ³-secretase complex, a four-protein complex with enzymatic activity to cleave peptides within membranes (kochi et al., 2002). lthough the cleavage site and the protein complex mediating the cleavage have been identified (kochi et al., 2002), the cellular compartment in which the cleavage event occurs is yet to be fully elucidated. he ³-secretase complex has been detected on the cell membrane as well as in endocytic compartments (upta-ossi et al., 2004), and recent work shows that the 3/4 cleavage can happen on the membrane as well as in endocytic compartments (detailed in next section). n addition, the activity of ³-secretase can also be regulated to affect otch signaling. or instance, loss of a regulator of epithelial polarity rumbs in the fly increases ³-secretase activity, which leads to an up-regulation of otch activity (erranz et al., 2006), and provides an example in which ³-secretase activity can be regulated to modulate otch activity.The cleavage events required for ligand-dependent Notch activation and the mechanisms to prevent ligand-independent activation
After Notch enters the Golgi, it is cleaved by Furin, a cleavage event that has been termed S1 cleavage (Logeat et al., 1998). Although the S1 cleavage of Notch can be observed in both fly and mammalian cell culture, whether it is essential for Notch activity is still a matter of debate. In flies, the majority of Notch protein does not undergo S1 cleavage, and mutations in furin 1 (CG10772) do not cause Notch signaling defects (Kidd and Lieber, 2002). However, a second furin-like paralogue (furin 2 [CG18743]) exists in flies, and its function is unknown. Because furin2 may play a redundant role with furin 1, a double mutant of both genes would be required to assess if S1 cleavage is indeed required in fly. In mammals, although small deletion mutants of Notch removing the S1 cleavage site are defective in signal transduction, these mutants may not only affect S1 cleavage but also S2 cleavage. Obviously, mutations affecting only the S1 cleavage site would be valuable for understanding its role in Notch signaling.
Notch is kept in an inactive state before ligand binding through a tight interaction between the LNRs and the HD (Fig. 2, top). From structural analyses, it appears that the S2 cleavage site in the HD is embedded and protected by the three LNRs (Gordon et al., 2007). The current hypothesis is that the pulling force generated by endocytosis of the ligand would weaken the interaction between the LNRs and the HD, thereby freeing the S2 cleavage and allowing access to the S2 site for the ADAM proteases (Fig. 2, bottom). Interestingly, in T-ALL patients, β�Ό30% of the mutations in NOTCH1 have been mapped to the interface of LNRs and the HD (Weng et al., 2004; Gordon et al., 2007). These mutations are thought to be GOF mutations causing a constitutive activation of Notch signaling. However, when these mutant proteins are overexpressed in mouse hematopoietic precursors, they fail to initiate leukemia on their own, although ectopic T cell development is observed (Chiang et al., 2008). However, these GOF alleles can accelerate the onset of leukemia initiation mediated by K-ras overexpression, which suggests that cooperation of the activated Notch and other oncogenes may underlie leukemia (Chiang et al., 2008). Although there are many mutations identified in the HD region of NOTCH1 in T-ALL patients, only one mutation was identified in the LNR region (Mansour et al., 2007), which suggests that there is a stringent control in the cell to monitor correct folding of LNRs. This hypothesis is strengthened by recent findings on Ero1L in the fly. Ero1L is an ER-associated thiol oxidase required for disulfide bond formation. Although it is presumably required for most if not all disulfide bond formation based on yeast data (Tu et al., 2000), the loss-of-function phenotypes of Ero1L in flies indicate a role in lateral inhibition during peripheral nervous system development and inductive signaling during adult wing formation (Tien et al., 2008), two hallmarks of Notch-related developmental contexts. Although both the DSL ligands and Notch contain numerous disulfide bonds in their ECD, Ero1L-deficient cells show a prominent accumulation of Notch inside the ER without affecting DSL localization and function, which suggests that the problem may lie in the LNRs of Notch. Note that the LNRs are only found in Notch in flies, although there are mammalian LNR-containing proteins termed pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A, pappalysin-1) and PAPP-A2 (Boldt et al., 2004), which have no homologues in D. melanogaster. Biochemical data further indicate that disulfide bonds in LNRs of Notch are targets of Ero1L (Tien et al., 2008). Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest that a stringent control of disulfide bond formation of the LNRs in the ER ensures the proper folding of LNRs (Tien et al., 2008).
Figure 2.X-ray structure of the human NOTCH2 negative regulatory region (NRR) in its autoinhibited conformation, and models for signal activation. The top panel shows a ribbon representation of the NOTCH2 NRR. The LNR modules are colored in different shades of pink and purple, and the HD is in white and green. The three bound Ca2+ ions are shown in green, the bound Zn2+ ion is purple, and the disulfide bonds are red. The positions of S1 and S2 cleavage are indicated with red arrows. The bottom panel shows the model for activation by mechanical force driven by the DSL endocytosis. For unbound Notch, the LNRs (pink structure in 1β€“4) protect the S2 cleavage site in HD (white structure in 1β€“4). When Notch binds to DSL, which then undergoes endocytosis (1 and 2), this generates a mechanical force for disengaging LNRs from the HD (shown in 1β€“3). This relaxation between LNRsβ€“HD interaction allows the metalloprotease to access the S2 cleavage site (shown in 4), leading to Notch activation. The figure is adapted from Gordon et al. (2007, 2008).After Notch is cleaved by a metalloprotease at the S2 site, the Notch external truncation (NEXT) domain is ready to be cleaved by the Ξ³-secretase complex, a four-protein complex with enzymatic activity to cleave peptides within membranes (Okochi et al., 2002). Although the cleavage site and the protein complex mediating the cleavage have been identified (Okochi et al., 2002), the cellular compartment in which the cleavage event occurs is yet to be fully elucidated. The Ξ³-secretase complex has been detected on the cell membrane as well as in endocytic compartments (Gupta-Rossi et al., 2004), and recent work shows that the S3/4 cleavage can happen on the membrane as well as in endocytic compartments (detailed in next section). In addition, the activity of Ξ³-secretase can also be regulated to affect Notch signaling. For instance, loss of a regulator of epithelial polarity Crumbs in the fly increases Ξ³-secretase activity, which leads to an up-regulation of Notch activity (Herranz et al., 2006), and provides an example in which Ξ³-secretase activity can be regulated to modulate Notch activity.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Endocytic trafficking of otch affects its activity
ndocytic trafficking affects the activity of several important signaling pathways (eto et al., 2002). uring endocytosis, a variety of molecules such as membrane components, receptors, and in some cases their associated ligands, are delivered to the endosomal pathway. n the classical endocytic pathway, cargo is internalized by clathrin-mediated endocytosis (ills, 2007), and the clathrin-coated vesicles are pinched off from the membrane by the dynamin ase (aba et al., 1995). he cargo in the clathrin-coated vesicles is then delivered to early endosomes (s) that in turn deliver endocytic cargo to late endosomes/multivesicular bodies (s) or target it for recycling. ecycling endosomes are believed to bud off from  membranes and then fuse with plasma membrane endosomes (eto et al., 2002). he s sort the cargo into internal vesicles and eventually deliver them to the lysosomes, where they are degraded (aksena et al., 2007).
umerous studies have validated an important role for endocytosis and recycling of  ligands in the signal-sending cell (mery and noblich, 2006; e orgne, 2006). owever, a role for endocytosis in the signal-receiving cell in regulating otch activity is still ill defined. he first piece of evidence showing that otch activity is subject to endocytic regulation came from studies in a temperature-sensitive dynamin mutant (shibire) in the fly (eugnet et al., 1997). t was shown that both the signal sending and receiving activity of otch signaling likely depends on dynamin-dependent endocytosis (eugnet et al., 1997). owever, overexpression of  does not lose its activity even when endocytosis is blocked in shibirets mutants. he later observation argues that in the overexpression scenario, a large quantity of  can bypass the requirement of endocytosis in cells receiving the signal.
ecent work, in which different endocytic mutants in . melanogaster were systematically analyzed for otch localization, processing, and signaling, lends further credence to the idea that the endocytosis of the otch receptor is crucial for its signaling ability (accari et al., 2008). enes involved in  fusion events such as ase ab5, and the syntaxin valanche (vl; ucherpfennig et al., 2003; u and ilder, 2005) are indeed required for endogenous activity of otch. t was shown that 3/4 cleavage of otch is much reduced when trafficking to the  is impaired, which suggests that at least part of the  is cleaved upon endocytosis (accari et al., 2008). onsistent with the idea that  may be cleaved mostly in the late endosomes, a new study indicates that an aquaporin (ig brain [bib] in . melanogaster) that is involved in endosomal maturation is also required for optimal otch activity. n the absence of bib,  arrests to form abnormal clusters, and otch accumulates in these abnormal endosomes, resulting in a otch partial loss-of-function phenotype (anwar and ortini, 2008). owever, mutants affecting protein sorting in the late endosomes or  result in otch  phenotypes, not loss-of-function phenotypes. n clones of lethal giant discs (lgd), which encodes a 2 domainβ€“containing protein that binds phospholipids, otch exhibits a ligand-independent  phenotype. n lgd mutant cells, s are enlarged, and otch accumulates in these abnormal s (hildress et al., 2006; allagher and noblich, 2006; evier and aiser, 2006). nother example of a otch  resulting from abnormal  maturation defects is observed in mutations of vps25, a component of the - complex involved in sorting  cargo into lysosomes (aksena et al., 2007). n vps25 mutant cells, there is a ligand-independent otch  phenotype (oberg et al., 2005; hompson et al., 2005; accari and ilder, 2005; erz et al., 2006). t has therefore been proposed that when there is an -to-lysosome maturation defect, there might be an increase in ³-secretase cleavage of , resulting in a ligand-independent otch  phenotype. his is consistent with data that suggest that ³-secretase can act in endosomes and has optimal activity at low p. H (Lah and Levey, 2000; Pasternak et al., 2003; Gupta-Rossi et al., 2004). Together, these data suggest a model in which both full-length Notch and NEXT are endocytosed and degraded in lysosomes.
This model is further supported by studies on another ligand-independent regulator of Notch endocytosis and activation called Deltex (Dx). Dx encodes a ring finger E3 ubiquitin ligase (Hori et al., 2004). Overexpressing Dx leads to the expression of Notch downstream genes in a Su(H)- and ligand-independent manner in the wing pouch of the third-instar wing disc. Overexpression of Dx also results in the translocation of Notch from the apical cell surface into the late endosome, where it accumulates stably and colocalizes with Dx. It has been reported that Dx interacts with a nonvisual Ξ²-arrestin Kurtz, and that together they form a trimeric protein complex with Notch (Mukherjee et al., 2005). Functional assay indicates that loss of Kurtz results in elevated levels of Notch, which is consistent with its role in regulating Notch stability (Mukherjee et al., 2005). Furthermore, when Notch trafficking is blocked using a dominant-negative form of Rab5, Dx-mediated activation of Notch signaling is inhibited, suggesting that the accumulation of Notch in the late endosome is required for Dx-dependent Notch activity (Hori et al., 2004). It was therefore proposed that Dx protects Notch from entering the degradative pathway, but how this is regulated is unclear. In a suppressor screen for the Dx overexpression phenotype, it was found that D. melanogaster homologues of the HOPS complex, which mediate late endosomal maturation and lysosomal fusion events (Warner et al., 1998; Seals et al., 2000; Wurmser et al., 2000; Rink et al., 2005), and components of the AP-3 complex, which traffics cargo to the lysosome-limiting membrane (Peden et al., 2004; Theos et al., 2005), are required for Dx-induced Notch endocytosis and activation (Wilkin et al., 2008). Dx activity opposes trafficking of Notch into the lumen of the lysosomes, where it is degraded and instead limits Notch to the limiting membrane of the lysosome membrane. This in turn results in Notch ectodomain shedding by lysosomal proteases. The truncated NEXT is then proposed to be cleaved by the Ξ³-secretase to release the NICD (Wilkin et al., 2008). This work provides further support to the model that lack of maturation of MVB/late endosomes into lysosomes results in ectopic Ξ³-secretaseβ€“mediated cleavage of Notch, leading to a GOF phenotype. In addition to Dx, the stability of the Notch receptor and other components of the pathway such as Numb are regulated by proteins that play a role in the ubiquitination pathway such as Su(Dx)/itchy (Fostier et al., 1998; Qiu et al., 2000), Sel-10 (Hubbard et al., 1997; Wu et al., 2001), Nedd4 (Sakata et al., 2004; Wilkin et al., 2004), Neuralized, Mindbomb (Lai and Rubin, 2001; Le Borgne and Schweisguth, 2003; Le Borgne et al., 2005b), and LNX (Nie et al., 2002). We refer the reader to reviews on the role of E3 ligases in the Notch pathway for further details (Lai, 2002; Le Borgne, 2006).
It is important to note that there might be different routes for Notch activation either on the membrane or inside endosomal compartments. For instance, in animals mutant for hrs (hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate), which encodes a protein involved in MVB formation (Lloyd et al., 2002), Notch accumulates in intracellular compartments without affecting its signaling activity. Although this may suggest that Hrs is not required for Notch signaling, removing hrs in an lgd background can inhibit its Notch GOF phenotypes, suggesting that Lgd acts in an Hrs-dependent pathway to down-regulate Notch (Childress et al., 2006; Gallagher and Knoblich, 2006; Sevier and Kaiser, 2006). Furthermore, when trafficking through the EE and MVB are disrupted, such as in a double mutant of avl (a syntaxin that regulates the trafficking to the EE), tsg101 (tumor suppressor gene 101, which encodes a component of the ESCRT-I complex that regulates MVB sorting), Notch activity is still slightly increased (Vaccari et al., 2008). However, based on prior data, the prediction was that Notch activity would be completely blocked because of the defect in EE formation. As this is not the case, alternative routes of Notch trafficking must exist that still need to be characterized. Also, the possibility of whether the localization and the activity of the Ξ³-secretase complex in the avl tsg101 double mutant background is altered has not been explored. Finally, although a critical role for ligand recycling in the signal-sending cell has been well characterized (Emery et al., 2005; Jafar-Nejad et al., 2005; Emery and Knoblich, 2006) a crucial role for the recycling of Notch receptors in the signal reception has not yet been uncovered (discussed in Le Borgne, 2006).
In summary, Notch is modified at different levels in the secretory pathway by glycosyltransferases during ligand activation by proteases, and recent evidence suggests that several players ensure that Notch does not undergo ligand independent-activation during endocytosis. These insights can be harnessed to manage Notch-related disease conditions and provide us interesting glimpses into the strategies used by cells to manage this critical signaling pathway.
</sections.4>

</text>
