<title>
Alternatives to cytology in the management of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
The natural history of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer is characterized by a high probability of recurrence and in the case of high-grade tumors, progression to muscle invasive cancer. This mandates a follow-up strategy designed to identify recurrences in the bladder early in their evolution in order to facilitate early intervention and ablation. Urine cytology is considered the gold standard urine biomarker. Although specificity exceeds 90% to 95%, its overall sensitivity ranges from 40% to 60% in expert hands and is both tumor grade and operator dependent. While cytology is an excellent test for detection of high-grade disease, the sensitivity is particularly weak for the detection of low grade tumors. This has spawned an entire field of research of in vitro diagnostic tests and cell-based assays in order to improve the diagnostic accuracy for detection of incident or recurrent disease. To date, the US Food and Drug Administration approved dipstick and immunoassays marketed as point-of-care tests. The point-of-care tests are intended for use as an adjunct to cystoscopy and cytology, and may have a role in the office evaluation of hematuria patients. Monoclonal antibody-based tests combined with cytology may improve the diagnostic accuracy and are superior to cytology alone. A recently approved cell-based assay, utilizing fluorescent in situ hybridization technology, may help resolve suspicious cytologies, and provide early and additional information about the biology of the bladder urothelium beyond that provided by cytology, a marker of disease relatively late in evolution. Novel promising markers are in various stages of clinical testing, and a panel of biomarkers may serve in the future as a feasible alternative to urine cytology and cystoscopy for the screening, detection, and follow-up of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.
</abstract>

</text>
