<title>
A case of graves' disease diagnosed in the course of bilateral carotid artery stenoses (moyamoya disease); a case report and review of the literature.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
A 14-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital after being diagnosed at a local clinic with bilateral carotid artery stenoses (Moyamoya disease) and mild thyrotoxicosis. A blood examination showed suppressed TSH and elevated triiodothyronine and thyroxine levels; however, he was negative for anti-thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAB) and thyroid stimulating antibody (TSAB). Concern about a possible thyroid crisis led us to administer thiamazole (MMI) and potassium iodide (KI), following which encephalo-duro-arterio-synangiosis (EDAS) of the left side was performed successfully. After about 1 mo, he became positive for TRAB and TSAB. He was thought to have Graves' disease and Moyamoya disease coincidentally. Several factors are considered to be involved in the coincidental onset of these two diseases.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
oyamoya disease is a cerebrovascular disorder characterized by bilateral stenoses or
occlusion of the terminal portions of the internal carotid arteries accompanied by typical
net-like collateral vessels at the base of the brain. oyamoya means mist or smoke in
apanese and describes the shapes of these collaterals. ts incidence is considered to be
higher in sian populations (1). n contrast, raves’
disease is an autoimmune antibody-mediated disease of the thyroid gland, one of the
characteristics of which is the development of anti-thyrotropin receptor antibody ()
(2). lthough rare, there have been several cases
described who suffered oyamoya disease and raves’ disease simultaneously.
e report an adolescent boy who developed raves’ disease and oyamoya disease
simultaneously, although elevation of autoantibodies was delayed. e also review some of the
literature and discuss the pathogenic relationship between raves’ disease and carotid
stenosis.Introduction
Moyamoya disease is a cerebrovascular disorder characterized by bilateral stenoses or
occlusion of the terminal portions of the internal carotid arteries accompanied by typical
net-like collateral vessels at the base of the brain. Moyamoya means mist or smoke in
Japanese and describes the shapes of these collaterals. Its incidence is considered to be
higher in Asian populations (1). In contrast, Graves’
disease is an autoimmune antibody-mediated disease of the thyroid gland, one of the
characteristics of which is the development of anti-thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAB)
(2). Although rare, there have been several cases
described who suffered Moyamoya disease and Graves’ disease simultaneously.
We report an adolescent boy who developed Graves’ disease and Moyamoya disease
simultaneously, although elevation of autoantibodies was delayed. We also review some of the
literature and discuss the pathogenic relationship between Graves’ disease and carotid
stenosis.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Case eport
 14-yr-boy went to a local clinic complaining of progressive weakness of his right arm,
which had been getting worse for the last 12 mo.  brain magnetic resonance imaging ()
scan showed small infarctions in the left anterior white matter (ig. 1a. Fig. 1 Brain MRI (FLAIR) (a) and SPECT (b). (a)
Small infarctions (white arrows) were found in the white matter of the left lobe. (b)
Decreased blood flow was found in the left anterior lobe.), and
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed decreased blood flow in the left
anterior lobe (Fig. 1b). A magnetic resonance
angiogram (MRA) revealed bilateral carotid stenoses and the presence of collaterals (Fig. 2Fig. 2 MRA (a) and magnetic
resonance T2-imaging (b, c). (a) Stenoses (white arrows) of carotid arteries were
detected. (b, c) The collaterals were found in the Sylvian fissure (white
circles).). He was diagnosed as having Moyamoya disease. In addition,
he had upper limb tremor, and so a physician investigated the possibility of
hyperthyroidism. Laboratory data showed low TSH (less than 0.1 μIU/ml, reference range:
0.1–4.5) and elevation of free T4 (FT4, 3.41 ng/dl: 0.8–2.2). He was referred to our
hospital and admitted.
On admission, he had a slight fever, and an elevated heart rate (120–150 beats /min) and
systolic blood pressure (130–160 mmHg) were detected. The results of a physical examination
were as follows. His BMI was 15.1 kg/m2. He had mild exophthalmos and a soft
goiter (Grade 2, according to WHO differentiation) with no nodules, pain or redness of the
neck. He also had tremor of both hands. Soft bruits over the cervical vessels were detected.
No abnormality was found in his electrocardiogram, and ultrasound investigation of the
thyroid gland revealed a heterogenous echotexture suggesting Graves’ disease. It also showed
no tumors or nodules.
Blood examination revealed more elevation of thyroid hormones (FT4, 4.31 ng/dl; freeT3
(FT3), 10.08 pg/ml, reference range: 5.1–2.6) and suppression of TSH (less than 0.1 μIU/ml).
His anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TGAB) level was in the normal range (33.6 IU/ml (0–40.6))
and he was positive for anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAB, 33.6 IU /ml (0–5.2)).
However, he was negative for TRAB (13.3% (–15.0 to +15.5)) and anti-thyroid stimulating
antibody (TSAB, 135% (less than 180)) (Table
1Table 1 Laboratory
data). Concern about a possible thyroid crisis led to the
early administration of thiamazole (MMI, 20 mg/day), potassium iodide (KI, 200 mg/day) and
bisoprolol fumarate (5 mg/day). Encephalo-duro-arterio-synangiosis (EDAS) was successfully
performed on his left side the next day.
After this treatment, his thyrotoxic symptoms remitted within about a wk; however, we could
not clarify whether his thyrotoxicosis was related to Graves’ disease or silent thyroiditis
because of his negative results for TRAB and TSAB. With the intent of making a differential
diagnosis of his thyrotoxic state, we discontinued MMI and KI once and followed his thyroid
function carefully every week in our outpatient clinic. On the 8th day after stopping MMI,
his thyroid function was almost in the normal range (FT4, 1.90 ng/dl, FT3 6.83 pg/ml, TSH
0.06 μIU/ml). Two weeks later, he came to our hospital with palpitation and fatigue. His FT4
level was elevated to 7.16 ng/dl, and he was positive for anti-TSH receptor antibodies (TRAB
20.6%, TSAB 182%) (Fig. 3Fig.
3 Clinical course). High,
homogeneous uptake of 99mTc was found on thyroid scintigraphy (Fig. 4Fig. 4 99mTc scintigraphy (day 50). Diffuse
and high uptake (23.1%) were detected.). We
diagnosed his thyrotoxicosis as Graves’ disease. Retreatment with antithyroid drugs brought
about remission of his thyroid function again, and he has a good prognosis.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Discussion
lthough it has previously been reported, coexistence of oyamoya disease and raves’
disease is rare, especially in children and adolescents. e could identify only eight cases
(including our own) younger than twenty years old (able 2able 2 ases with
coexistence of raves’ disease and oyamoya disease (younger than 20 yr
old)) (1,2,3,4,5,6,7). ost of them
were girls and were diagnosed with oyamoya disease in their thyrotoxic states. rain 
revealed infarction in six of them. ounger individuals with oyamoya disease may tend to
present with ischemic cerebrovascular disease, whereas older individuals may present with
cerebral hemorrhage (8). reatments with antithyroid
drugs or radioactive iodine are usually carried out before reconstruction surgery of brain
vessels. n two cases, ischemic symptoms improved with antithyroid drug administration alone
(3, 4).
here is some debate about the relationship of these two diseases. anegyres et
al. (9) and endler et al.
(10) reported autopsy cases of oyamoya disease and
found that there was a prominent lymphocytic infiltration, the majority of cells within
which were -cell marker-positive lymphocytes, in the media of a terminal left internal
carotid wall. hey concluded that autoimmune mechanisms that worked for the development of
raves’ disease might also play an important role in the onset of oyamoya disease. okimura
et al. (7) reported one pair of a
mother and a daughter who both developed oyamoya disease and rave’s disease, and
implicated genetic factors because one gene locus of oyamoya disease (chromosome 8q23,
3) is very close to that of autoimmune thyroid disease (8q23-24). urthermore, patients
with oyamoya disease may be more likely to have elevated thyroid autoantibodies than those
with non-oyamoya disease strokes (11). inally,
sympathetic nervous system stimulation caused by hyperthyroidism might contribute to the
development of stenosis of the intracranial arteries. hyrotoxic states might accelerate the
progressive occlusive disease of the intracranial arteries (12).
ur case had no family history of raves’ disease or brain ischemia. e had bilateral
stenoses of the carotid arteries, but brain infarction was found only on the left side when
he was in a thyrotoxic state. e had  surgery on the left side at almost the same time
that he began taking antithyroid drugs, and therefore, we could not estimate the correlation
between the recovery of his ischemic symptoms and thyroid function. owever, brain
infarction in the right hemisphere did not develop after the administration of , which
might imply that the remission of thyrotoxicosis prevented further stenosis and occlusion
the brain vessels of his right side. owever, we were unable to ultimately conclude which
phenomena, hyperdynamic state or autoimmune system played a more important role.
t first admission due to oyamoya disease, he was negative for both  and ,
although his thyrotoxicosis was apparent. n interviews with him and his parents, suspicious
symptoms of thyrotoxicosis (fatigue, excess food consumption, diarrhea, sweating, etc.) were
found beginning about two years previously. f this was the start of hyperthyroidism, he
might have been in a chronic thyrotoxic state for more than one year. lthough a few cases
of patients being  negative at the beginning of clinical symptoms have been reported
(13,14,15), the mechanism of late  elevation and its
correlation with development of oyamoya disease remain to be elucidated.Discussion
Although it has previously been reported, coexistence of Moyamoya disease and Graves’
disease is rare, especially in children and adolescents. We could identify only eight cases
(including our own) younger than twenty years old (Table 2Table 2 Cases with
coexistence of Graves’ disease and Moyamoya disease (younger than 20 yr
old)) (1,2,3,4,5,6,7). Most of them
were girls and were diagnosed with Moyamoya disease in their thyrotoxic states. Brain MRI
revealed infarction in six of them. Younger individuals with Moyamoya disease may tend to
present with ischemic cerebrovascular disease, whereas older individuals may present with
cerebral hemorrhage (8). Treatments with antithyroid
drugs or radioactive iodine are usually carried out before reconstruction surgery of brain
vessels. In two cases, ischemic symptoms improved with antithyroid drug administration alone
(3, 4).
There is some debate about the relationship of these two diseases. Panegyres et
al. (9) and Tendler et al.
(10) reported autopsy cases of Moyamoya disease and
found that there was a prominent lymphocytic infiltration, the majority of cells within
which were T-cell marker-positive lymphocytes, in the media of a terminal left internal
carotid wall. They concluded that autoimmune mechanisms that worked for the development of
Graves’ disease might also play an important role in the onset of Moyamoya disease. Tokimura
et al. (7) reported one pair of a
mother and a daughter who both developed Moyamoya disease and Grave’s disease, and
implicated genetic factors because one gene locus of Moyamoya disease (chromosome 8q23,
MYMY3) is very close to that of autoimmune thyroid disease (8q23-24). Furthermore, patients
with Moyamoya disease may be more likely to have elevated thyroid autoantibodies than those
with non-Moyamoya disease strokes (11). Finally,
sympathetic nervous system stimulation caused by hyperthyroidism might contribute to the
development of stenosis of the intracranial arteries. Thyrotoxic states might accelerate the
progressive occlusive disease of the intracranial arteries (12).
Our case had no family history of Graves’ disease or brain ischemia. He had bilateral
stenoses of the carotid arteries, but brain infarction was found only on the left side when
he was in a thyrotoxic state. He had EDAS surgery on the left side at almost the same time
that he began taking antithyroid drugs, and therefore, we could not estimate the correlation
between the recovery of his ischemic symptoms and thyroid function. However, brain
infarction in the right hemisphere did not develop after the administration of MMI, which
might imply that the remission of thyrotoxicosis prevented further stenosis and occlusion
the brain vessels of his right side. However, we were unable to ultimately conclude which
phenomena, hyperdynamic state or autoimmune system played a more important role.
At first admission due to Moyamoya disease, he was negative for both TRAB and TSAB,
although his thyrotoxicosis was apparent. In interviews with him and his parents, suspicious
symptoms of thyrotoxicosis (fatigue, excess food consumption, diarrhea, sweating, etc.) were
found beginning about two years previously. If this was the start of hyperthyroidism, he
might have been in a chronic thyrotoxic state for more than one year. Although a few cases
of patients being TRAB negative at the beginning of clinical symptoms have been reported
(13,14,15), the mechanism of late TRAB elevation and its
correlation with development of Moyamoya disease remain to be elucidated.
</sections.2>

</text>
