<title>
An in vitro co-infection model to study Plasmodium falciparum-HIV-1 interactions in human primary monocyte-derived immune cells.
</title>

<text>

<sections.0>
Protocol

ote: xperiments with -1 and lasmodium falciparum must be
performed in the proper biosafety level laboratories (2 for parasites, and 3 for -1
and co-infections) and special precaution must be taken when using potentially infected
human blood.
1. eripheral lood ononuclear ells () urification (ased on 8 and
9)tart with fresh human blood from healthy donors (500 ml) treated with anticoagulants
(heparin, citrate, acid citrate dextrose or citrate phosphate dextrose). se
endotoxin-free reagents when purifying and isolating  and throughout the rest of
the protocol.isinfect the blood bag, including the tube, with 70% ethanol, cut the tube and
carefully transfer the blood into a 150 flask.repare 16 tubes with 15 ml ymphocytes eparation edium (icoll) per 50 ml conical
tube (make sure that icoll has reached room temperature). arefully layer 30 ml of
fresh blood on top.entrifuge at 400 x g for 30 min at 20 ° with breaks off.uring the centrifugation, prepare 8 x 50 ml conical tubes with 25 ml of room
temperature ank's alanced alt olution () per tube.
arefully transfer the cloudy cell ring at the interface (contains )
to the 50 ml tube containing the  (pool 2 cell rings per tube). omplete volumes
up to 50 ml with .entrifuge at 150 x g for 15 min at 20 ° with breaks on.uring centrifugation of the cloudy cell ring, collect the yellow upper layer from
the icoll step, pool the plasma to fill up a 50 ml conical tube. nactivate
complement in plasma by heating the 50 ml tube at 56 ° for 30 min and spin 10 min at
1,800 x g. eep the supernatant (contains diluted autologous plasma that can be used
as medium supplement at later steps).
arefully remove the supernatant and resuspend the cell pellet from step
1.7 in 25 ml of  and pool 2 pellets per 50 ml tube. pin at 300 x g for 8 min at
20 °.emove the supernatant carefully and resuspend the pellets in 10 ml  and pool in
one 50 ml tube.ake an aliquot, perform trypan blue exclusion to assess mortality and then count
.omplete volume to 50 ml with  and spin 10 min at 300 x g. emove the supernatant
and resuspend the cells in  1640 at 5x106 cells/ml (one should obtain
around 400-500 x 106  from 500 ml of blood).2. onocytes-erived acrophages () ifferentiation (ased on 8 and
9)eed approximately 1.25 x 108  in 15 cm dishes with  1640 (25
ml/dish).et cells adhere for 1-2 hr at 37 ° with 5% 2 atmosphere.ransfer non-adhered cells in a new flask and wash plate with 15 ml endotoxin-free
 twice (5 min, 300 x g). he adhered cells are isolated monocytes.o allow freshly isolated monocytes to differentiate into , add 20 ml of  1640
medium supplemented with 5% autologous plasma (from step 1.8). dd human recombinant
acrophage olony timulating actor (-, 25 ng/ml) and enicillin/treptomycin
solution (, 100 /ml enicillin, 100 g/ml treptomycin). ncubate for 2 days,
change medium and incubate 2-3 extra days at 37 ° in 5% 2
atmosphere.emove old medium and wash with endotoxin-free  once, add the  gently and
aspirate immediately. o detach fully differentiated , treat cells with ~7 ml
ccutase (ccutase, a commercially available mix of proteases and collagenolytic
activity that allow the detachment of cells from the plastic dish) for 15-20 min at 37
° in a 5% 2 atmosphere, rock gently at mid-time.dd 3-5 ml autologous plasma (from step 1.8) in each plate (to help protect the cells
while scraping).ently scrape cells making sure that medium covers the cells at all times and
transfer/pool in a 50 ml tube.inse plates with endotoxin-free  to recover as many cells as possible.pin 5 min at 200 x g, discard supernatant.esuspend pellet in 5 ml  culture medium ( 1640 supplemented with 10%
complement-inactivated etal ovine erum (i. FBS), PS, 25 mM HEPES) and count cells
(MDM yield usually 2-8% of total PBMC). Note: an aliquot of MDM might be taken in this
step to assess cell population purity by flow cytometry; usually 99% of obtained MDM
express CD14.Seed 1x105 MDM in 600 ΞΌl of MDM culture medium per well in 24-well
plates.Incubate overnight at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere before infections.3. Production and Quantitation of HIV-1 Viral StocksProduce viral stocks using calcium phosphate transfection in HEK293T cells following
the protocol of Fortin et al. 10.In order to obtain single cycle viruses containing the luciferase-encoding reporter
gene, co-transfect HEK293T cells with either 20 ΞΌg of
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+ and 10 ΞΌg of
pHCMV-G, or 15 ΞΌg of
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+ and 15 ΞΌg of
pJRFLenv. Use 30 ΞΌg of
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+ to generate
control glycoprotein-deficient viruses. For the fully replicative virus, use 30 ΞΌg of
NL4.3Balenv. The vectors pHCMV-G and pJRFLenv
encode the envelope glycoproteins of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV-G) and of a
CXCR5-tropic HIV-1 (different than NL4.3Balenv), respectively.
Additional information on the plasmids can be obtained from 8. Plasmids can
be obtained through the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Program (NIAID, NIH).Quantify all viral stocks using ELISA for the HIV-1 p24 capsid protein11,
and verify their infectious potential prior to use. We assess the infectivity of our
virus stocks through the use of TZM-bl indicator cells12.4. Culture of Plasmodium falciparum Parasites (Based on
13)4.1 General culture and maintenance of parasitesMaintain P. falciparum 3D7 asexual stage parasites in human
erythrocytes (blood group O+) at a 4% hematocrit in RPMI 1640 (buffered with 25 mM
HEPES and 25 mM NaHCO3) supplemented with 0.5% (w/v) Albumax II, 25 ΞΌg/ml
Gentamicin and 370ΞΌM Hypoxanthine at 37 Β°C in a gas mixture of 1% oxygen/5% carbon
dioxide in nitrogen.Parasitemia can be monitored by making a thin smear of the culture and staining with
a 15% Giemsa solution.Always maintain an uninfected red blood cells (uRBC) culture dish in the same
conditions as parasites to use as a control. To obtain late stage parasites
(trophozoites/early schizonts), synchronize the parasites as follows:4.2 Parasite synchronizationIn the morning, harvest the parasite culture, spin 5 min at 300 x g and discard the
supernatant.Resuspend pellet in 5 packed cell volumes with 5% (w/v) D-Sorbitol and incubate 5 min
at 37 Β°C.Spin 5 min at 300 x g, discard supernatant, resuspend pellet in 30
ml culture medium and put back in incubator.Approximately 8 hr later, repeat steps 4.2.1 to 4.2.3 in order to obtain tightly
synchronized parasites. Late stage parasites (trophozoites/early schizonts) can then
be harvested the following morning to perform the experiment. Prior to purification,
perform Giemsa staining to confirm lifecycle stage.4.3 Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells (iRBC)
purificationSterilize the VarioMacs separator (stand and magnet) with 70% ethanol and place it
under the biological hood.Fix the three-way stopcock to CS column bottom.Cut the end of the needle plastic protector with the Miltenyi special cutter and fix
the needle to the stopcock bottom.Lock the column into the magnet carefully.Remove all air bubbles in the column by slowly injecting 10 ml of MDM culture medium
with the kit-enclosed syringe screwed on the left side of the stopcock.Wash column with ~20 ml MDM culture medium.Harvest RBC from the culture plate, wash once with 10 ml MDM medium (300 x g, 5 min)
and resuspend the RBC pellet in 12 ml MDM culture medium. Slowly add to column and let
the suspension flow through (only infected red blood cells containing parasites in the
trophozoite or schizont stage will be retained by the magnetic field due to the
presence of hemozoin crystals).Wash once with 20 ml medium and stop liquid flow when it reaches the white disc on
top of the column.Remove the column from the magnet and elute iRBC in a clean sterile tube with 12 ml
MDM culture medium.Smear an aliquot of the recovered iRBC and perform Giemsa staining to confirm
lifecycle stage.Count recovered iRBC using a haemocytometer (isolated RBC are 100% iRBC).Pellet cells (300 x g, 5 min), discard supernatant and treat cells with 500 ΞΌl fresh
AB+ human serum (opsonisation step14).Incubate for 30 min at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.Wash once with 10 ml MDM culture medium (300 x g, 5 min), and
resuspend iRBC to desired concentration. Usually, a 10% parasitemia 15 cm culture dish
roughly gives ~0.5-1x108 tightly synchronized iRBC.5. Exposure of MDM to Plasmodium falciparumTo expose the MDM to uRBC or iRBC, cells must be resuspended in MDM culture medium in
order to obtain a ratio of uRBC/iRBC:MDM of 75:1. In previously prepared 24-well
plates containing MDM, add appropriate RBC suspension volume to each well. Perform all
experiments in triplicate.Incubate co-cultures for 4 hr at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.Wash the cells with 600 ΞΌl of endotoxin-free PBS 3 times, add the PBS gently and
aspirate immediately.To lyse the remaining RBC, wash the wells by adding 200 ΞΌl of ice-cold sterile water
for 20 sec and aspirate.Add 600 ΞΌl MDM culture medium and incubate 24 hr at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2
atmosphere.6. Infection of MDM with a Fully Replicative HIV-1In order to assess the effect of P. falciparum on HIV-1 replication
in MDM, add, according to the scheme outlined in Figure 1A, 10 ng of p24
(in 300 ΞΌl of MDM media) of NL4.3Balenv viruses in the appropriate
wells; add only MDM medium in control wells.Incubate 2 hr at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.Wash the cells with endotoxin-free PBS 3 times, add the PBS gently and aspirate
immediately. Add 600 ΞΌl of fresh MDM medium per well.Incubate at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.At days 3, 6, 9 and 12 following the start of viral infection, harvest 200 ΞΌl of each
supernatant, adding 200 ΞΌl of fresh MDM medium thereafter. Keep the harvested
supernatants at -20 Β°C for quantitation of the major HIV-1 capsid p24 protein by ELISA
following Fortin et al.10.7. Infection of MDM with Single Cycle Virus Encoding LuciferaseIn order to determine the parasite's impact on HIV-1 gene expression in MDM, add,
according to the scheme outlined in Figure 1B, 10 ng p24 (in 300 ΞΌl of
MDM medium) of either
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(VSV-G),
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(JRFLenv)
or NL4.3Luc+Env-R+ viruses in the
corresponding wells.Incubate 2 hr at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.Wash the cells with 600 ΞΌl of endotoxin-free PBS 3 times, add the PBS gently and
aspirate immediately. Add 600 ΞΌl of fresh MDM medium per well.Incubate at 37 Β°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.Remove the medium 72 hr following infection and add 200 ΞΌl of lysis buffer 1X
(supplied with the luciferase assay kit). Let the cells lyse at room temperature with
gentle shaking. Store at -20 Β°C.Thaw the plate and transfer 40 ΞΌl of the lysate to a 96-well luminometer plate; add
100 ΞΌl of luciferase substrate (supplied with the luciferase assay kit) and measure
the luciferase (Firefly luciferase) activity in a luminometer following the
manufacturer's instructions.8. Representative ResultsUsing our co-infection model, we show that exposure of P. falciparum to
MDM decreases their susceptibility to HIV-1 infection. Indeed, a significant decrease
(p<0.05; 2 way ANOVA, day 12) in the release of viral particles, as measured by HIV-1
p24 capsid protein in the supernatant, is observed in MDM pretreated with parasites
(Figure 2A). This observation is confirmed in cells infected by viruses
encoding a luciferase-reporter gene. MDM infection with such viruses harboring either
exogenous VSV-G or HIV-1 glycoproteins leads to significantly (p<0.05, Student's
t-test) less luciferase production in cells exposed to P. falciparum
(Figure 2B). It is noteworthy that VSV-G-pseudotyped viruses yielded much
greater luciferase activity than their JRFLenv counterparts; this is due to the greater
infection efficiency of VSV-G pseudotyped particles15. Given that parasite
exposition to MDM impacts both types of viruses, this suggests that it influences some
step in viral gene expression (Figure 2B). It is also important to mention
that cell viability was not affected by MDM exposition to iRBC (data not shown),
indicating that the inhibition observed is specific and not due to cell mortality.

 Figure 1. A) Plate scheme for MDM infection with a fully replicative virus.
Mock: uninfected cells. uRBC: cells exposed to uninfected red blood cells. iRBC:
cells exposed to Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells. Bal:
cells infected with NL4.3Balenv. Bal/uRBC: cells exposed to uRBC and
infected with NL4.3Balenv. Bal/iRBC: cells exposed to iRBC and infected
with NL4.3Balenv. B) Plate scheme for MDM infection with single
cycle luciferase-encoding virus. Mock: uninfected cells. uRBC: cells exposed to
uninfected red blood cells. iRBC: cells exposed to Plasmodium
falciparum-infected red blood cells. Ξ”env: cells infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+. JRFL: cells infected
with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(JRFLenv).
vsv-g: cells infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(vsv-g).
Ξ”env/uRBC: cells exposed to uRBC and infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+. Ξ”env/iRBC: cells exposed to iRBC and
infected with NL4.3Luc+Env-R+.
JRFL/uRBC: cells exposed to uRBC and infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(JRFLenv).
JRFL/iRBC: cells exposed to iRBC and infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(JRFLenv).
vsv-g/uRBC: cells exposed to uRBC and infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(vsv-g).
vsv-g/iRBC: cells exposed to iRBC and infected with
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(vsv-g).

 Figure 2. A) Effect of Plasmodium falciparum on HIV-1 viral
production in MDM. MDM were exposed to uRBC or iRBC at a ratio 75:1
(uRBC/iRBC:MDM) for 4 hr and extensively washed. Cells were infected with 10ng of
NL4.3Balenv p24 for 2 hr. Viral production was
monitored by ELISA for HIV-1 p24 in cell-free supernatant at different time points
following initial viral infection. A representative experiment is shown. B) Effect
of Plasmodium falciparum on HIV-1 viral transcription in MDM.
MDM were infected with uRBC or iRBC at a ratio 75:1 (uRBC/iRBC:MDM). Cells were
then infected with 10ng of p24 of single cycle virus (either
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+,
NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(JRFLenv)
or NL4.3Luc+Env-R+(vsv-g)). Luciferase
expression was evaluated in cell lysates 72 hr following initial virus infection. A
representative experiment is shown.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Discussion
e have illustrated here two different approaches to analyze the impact of the malaria
parasite on the -1 viral cycle, i.e. by analyzing either viral gene
expression or progeny virus production and replication in monocyte-derived macrophages.
imilar approaches have been used for other -1-parasite co-infections16.
owever, these new data are a step forward in the investigation of malaria--1
co-infections. ndeed, iou et al.8 studied the effect of
hemozoin, not live parasites, on -1 replication; in agreement with our results, they
observed that hemozoin was itself sufficient to inhibit viral production by , and not
s.
sing the described experimental layout, we observed that . falciparum
exerts a clear detrimental effect on the -1 replicative cycle in macrophages: a
significant inhibition of viral production is observed in macrophages pre-exposed to
parasites (igure 2) and a specific impact of the parasite on viral
transcription is illustrated in igure 2. owever, we cannot leave out any
additional effects of the parasite on viral entry or fusion (decapsidation), or on
post-integration mechanisms, such as protein synthesis or viral particle assembly and
budding. urthermore, it is possible that a different impact on -1 replication would be
obtained if the parasite were added either at the same time or following  infection with
the virus.
ur in vitro co-infection model provides a powerful tool to perform
detailed investigations of -1/. falciparum interactions in the host
cell. or example, the combination of this experimental layout with other techniques such as
quantitative real time , which can target and quantify specific steps in viral
retrotranscription and viral genome integration to the host cell genome, are quite feasible
and should yield further insights into the mechanisms involved in co-infections. oreover,
specific assays to evaluate early steps of the viral cycle (viral fusion, decapsidation,
entry quantitation) can be applied to this basic protocol to further analyze the effect on
viral replication. hese modifications show how flexible this protocol is concerning -1
quantitation and detection: indeed, even standard -1 reverse transcriptase quantitation
assays using tritium-labeled nucleotides could conceivably replace the  for -1 p24.
n addition to , we expect our system to be adaptable to other cell types relevant for
-1-malaria interactions, such as monocytes and dendritic cells. he fact that  are
adherent cells facilitates their manipulation, allowing for easy washing out of i. RBC that
have not been taken in, or that are in contact with MDM, without eliminating any
macrophages. Such an advantage would not apply to dendritic cells and monocytes, which are
cultured in suspension, complicating the separation of uRBC and free iRBC with such cells
and we are currently addressing this issue. Our system could also be useful to study more
complex interactions such as the effects of Plasmodium-exposed
monocyte-derived cells on the HIV-1 viral cycle in other immune cells such as CD4-positive T
cells in co-culture experiments. Finally, our protocol could be suitable for experiments
looking at the effect of P. falciparum iRBCs on HIV-1 reactivation in PBMC
for HIV-1 infected individuals.
Ethics statementHuman PBMC were obtained from the blood of healthy donors, in accordance with the
guidelines of the Bioethics Committee of the Centre Hospitalier de l'UniversitΓ© Laval
Research Center. A written consent was obtained from all blood donors.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Disclosures
o conflicts of interest declared.Disclosures
No conflicts of interest declared.
</sections.2>

</text>
