<title>
Can novel therapeutics halt the amyloid cascade?
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
The amyloid hypothesis provides a basis for the development of new therapeutic strategies in Alzheimer's disease. Two large trials have recently been published. The first is a phase 2 study of passive immunotherapy with bapineuzumab, a humanized anti-Abeta monoclonal antibody directed against the N-terminus of Abeta. This trial showed no differences within dose cohorts on the primary efficacy analysis. Exploratory analyses showed potential treatment differences on cognitive and functional endpoints in study completers and apolipoprotein E epsilon4 noncarriers. A safety concern was the occurrence of reversible vasogenic edema. The second study is a phase 3 trial of tarenflurbil, a modulator of the activity of gamma-secretase. Tarenflurbil had no beneficial effect on the primary or secondary outcomes. The tarenflurbil group had a small increase in frequency of dizziness, anemia, and infections. Possible explanations for the negative results of these trials may be related to the study design or the choice of dosage. However, it may also be that these negative findings reflect our still incomplete understanding of, at least part of, the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
espite a significant increase in our understanding of the pathogenesis of lzheimer's disease () over the past two decades, the therapeutic options are still very modest. holinesterase inhibitors and the -methyl--aspartate receptor agonists currently available have a modest clinical effect but do not intervene with the underlying pathophysiology [1]. he ultimate aim of  therapy is to stop or slow down the underlying disease process.
ecently the first two large trials with drugs that may slow disease progression have been published: a phase 2, passive immunization trial with bapineuzumab; and a phase 3 trial with tarenflurbil, a modulator of ³-secretase. oth drugs supposedly interfere with ²-amyloid (²) metabolism. bnormalities in ² processing are thought to be central in  pathophysiology according to the amyloid cascade hypothesis. he mode of action of bapineuzumab is to remove aggregated ², while tarenflurbil decreases the production of the pathogenic ²42 peptide. n the present commentary, we discuss the results of these trials and the implications for future therapy and insight into  pathophysiology.Introduction
Despite a significant increase in our understanding of the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) over the past two decades, the therapeutic options are still very modest. Cholinesterase inhibitors and the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor agonists currently available have a modest clinical effect but do not intervene with the underlying pathophysiology [1]. The ultimate aim of AD therapy is to stop or slow down the underlying disease process.
Recently the first two large trials with drugs that may slow disease progression have been published: a phase 2, passive immunization trial with bapineuzumab; and a phase 3 trial with tarenflurbil, a modulator of Ξ³-secretase. Both drugs supposedly interfere with Ξ²-amyloid (AΞ²) metabolism. Abnormalities in AΞ² processing are thought to be central in AD pathophysiology according to the amyloid cascade hypothesis. The mode of action of bapineuzumab is to remove aggregated AΞ², while tarenflurbil decreases the production of the pathogenic AΞ²42 peptide. In the present commentary, we discuss the results of these trials and the implications for future therapy and insight into AD pathophysiology.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
The amyloid cascade
he amyloid hypothesis has led to an understanding of the pathology of , and also provides a basis for novel drug development. his hypothesis suggests that increased ²42 production and subsequent aggregation in limbic and association cortices leads to synaptic changes and causes deposition of ²42 in diffuse plaques, which in turn causes microglial and astrocytic activation. s a result, altered neuronal homeostasis and oxidative injury lead to tangle formation, and eventually to neuronal and synaptic dysfunction and selective neuronal loss [2,3]. he most important implied prediction of the hypothesis is that reduction of ² aggregation would ameliorate  symptoms.
hree methods for intervening in the amyloid cascade have thus far been tested in clinical trials: active immunization, passive immunization, and modulation of ³-secretase [4,5]. n this light we shall discuss the two recent clinical trials mentioned above: the phase 2 trial with bapineuzumab, and the phase 3 trial with tarenflurbil.The amyloid cascade
The amyloid hypothesis has led to an understanding of the pathology of AD, and also provides a basis for novel drug development. This hypothesis suggests that increased AΞ²42 production and subsequent aggregation in limbic and association cortices leads to synaptic changes and causes deposition of AΞ²42 in diffuse plaques, which in turn causes microglial and astrocytic activation. As a result, altered neuronal homeostasis and oxidative injury lead to tangle formation, and eventually to neuronal and synaptic dysfunction and selective neuronal loss [2,3]. The most important implied prediction of the hypothesis is that reduction of AΞ² aggregation would ameliorate AD symptoms.
Three methods for intervening in the amyloid cascade have thus far been tested in clinical trials: active immunization, passive immunization, and modulation of Ξ³-secretase [4,5]. In this light we shall discuss the two recent clinical trials mentioned above: the phase 2 trial with bapineuzumab, and the phase 3 trial with tarenflurbil.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Bapineuzumab
apineuzumab is a humanized anti-² monoclonal antibody. reclinical passive immunotherapy studies with monoclonal anti-² antibodies in a mouse model of  showed antibody binding to ² plaques, reduction in ² plaque burden, and reversal of memory defects [6,7]. apineuzumab is directed against the -terminus of ² and is hypothesized to bind to ² in the brain and to facilitate its removal.
he recently published phase 2 multiple-ascending-dose trial in mild to moderate  tested the safety and efficacy of bapineuzumab [8]. wo hundred and thirty-four  patients were randomly assigned to intravenous bapineuzumab (n = 124) or to placebo (n = 110) in four dose cohorts (0.15, 0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 mg/kg). atients received six infusions, 13 weeks apart, with final assessments 18 months later. he primary efficacy analysis compared treatment differences within dose cohorts on the lzheimer's isease ssessment cale for ognition and on the isability ssessment for ementia. o significant differences were found in the primary efficacy analysis.
xploratory analyses, however, showed potential treatment differences on cognitive and functional endpoints in study completers and apolipoprotein  () µ4 noncarriers. n this subgroup, subjects on active treatment showed 5 points less decline on the lzheimer's isease ssessment cale for ognition after 78 weeks compared with placebo.  safety concern was the occurrence of reversible vasogenic edema, detected on brain magnetic resonance imaging in 10% of the bapineuzumab-treated patients. asogenic edema was more frequent in  µ4 carriers, which may suggest that vasogenic edema is related to vascular amyloid burden since  µ4 carriers show more vascular amyloid deposition.
he potential treatment differences in the exploratory analyses have led to the evaluation of bapineuzumab in a phase 3 trial that started in ecember 2007, which will take possible treatment differences by  µ4 status into consideration. eanwhile, a recent publication showed that treatment with bapineuzumab for 78 weeks reduced fibrillar amyloid burden in subjects with , shown by ittsburgh compound  positron emission tomography ((i. B-PET) [9].
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Tarenflurbil
arenflurbil is a modulator of the activity of ³-secretase, and may for that reason act as an ²42 lowering agent. n mouse models of , tarenflurbil prevents learning and memory deficits and reduces ²42 brain concentrations [10]. n an earlier phase 2 trial in 210  patients, mildly affected patients (baseline mini-mental state examination 20 to 26), who received 800 mg tarenflurbil twice per day, had lower rates of decline in activities of daily living and global function compared with subjects who received placebo [11].
hese results led to a large multicentre, phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for the evaluation of the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of tarenflurbil in 1,684 subjects with mild  (mini-mental state examination 15 to 26) [12]. nitially, patients were assigned to treatment with tarenflurbil at doses of either 400 or 800 mg twice daily or placebo. fter an analysis of phase 2 data indicated that subjects had the strongest response to 800 mg tarenflurbil twice daily, however, the 400 mg dose was ended. he main outcome measures were the change from baseline to 18 months score on the lzheimer's isease ssessment cale for ognition and on the lzheimer's isease ooperative tudy - ctivities of aily iving scale. arenflurbil had no beneficial effect on the primary or secondary outcomes. he  genotype had no effect on treatment response. he tarenflurbil group had a small increase in frequency of dizziness, anemia, and infections.Tarenflurbil
Tarenflurbil is a modulator of the activity of Ξ³-secretase, and may for that reason act as an AΞ²42 lowering agent. In mouse models of AD, tarenflurbil prevents learning and memory deficits and reduces AΞ²42 brain concentrations [10]. In an earlier phase 2 trial in 210 AD patients, mildly affected patients (baseline mini-mental state examination 20 to 26), who received 800 mg tarenflurbil twice per day, had lower rates of decline in activities of daily living and global function compared with subjects who received placebo [11].
These results led to a large multicentre, phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for the evaluation of the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of tarenflurbil in 1,684 subjects with mild AD (mini-mental state examination 15 to 26) [12]. Initially, patients were assigned to treatment with tarenflurbil at doses of either 400 or 800 mg twice daily or placebo. After an analysis of phase 2 data indicated that subjects had the strongest response to 800 mg tarenflurbil twice daily, however, the 400 mg dose was ended. The main outcome measures were the change from baseline to 18 months score on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale for Cognition and on the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study - Activities of Daily Living scale. Tarenflurbil had no beneficial effect on the primary or secondary outcomes. The APOE genotype had no effect on treatment response. The tarenflurbil group had a small increase in frequency of dizziness, anemia, and infections.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Discussion
hat have these two trials taught us? he bapineuzumab trial showed that intravenous administration of the serial bapineuzumab doses is feasible and, as long as the possible occurrence of vasogenic edema is monitored, is relatively safe. he positron emission tomography substudy provided the suggestion that bapineuzumab indeed reduces amyloid load in vivo. he lack of effect on the primary endpoint of the trial may be due to the fact that, as the authors point out, it was underpowered to show small differences in efficacy. ndeed, a larger sample size would have increased the ability to detect statistically significant differences, but this does not alter the notion that clinical effects may still be small and of limited relevance. n the case of the tarenflurbil trial, it is possible that the dose of 800 mg twice daily was still too low. he discrepant findings between the phase 2 subgroup analyses and the phase 3 study strongly caution against apparent overinterpretation of post hoc analyses.
he findings may also have implications for the amyloid hypothesis. irst, it is possible that the relation between amyloid processing and  is modified by the  genotype, and in this respect it will be interesting to see how a possible treatment effect may differ by  µ4 status in the new phase 3 bapineuzumab study. t stresses again how important  is in several aspects of  [13,14].
econd, as reduction of ²42 was not effective and removal of aggregated ² had a limited effect, other ² species may be the main toxic agent in  or the  pathology may not depend on ². lternative models for  pathophysiology may better explain how accumulation of ²42 leads to tangle formation, and why tangle formation is closer to neuronal cell death than amyloid accumulation [2].
hird, reduction of ² production or removal of ² may not be successful in patients who already have a substantial amyloid burden if the cascade becomes independent of amyloid burden once ²42 accumulation has set off an irreversible chain of events.
inally, the amyloid hypothesis neglects the role of cerebrovascular damage, which is typically comorbid in older patients with , and may be a crucial cofactor in causing neurodegeneration and may interact with the pathology of  [15]. erebrovascular damage is a factor that may have to be taken into account when developing new therapeutic strategies for .Discussion
What have these two trials taught us? The bapineuzumab trial showed that intravenous administration of the serial bapineuzumab doses is feasible and, as long as the possible occurrence of vasogenic edema is monitored, is relatively safe. The positron emission tomography substudy provided the suggestion that bapineuzumab indeed reduces amyloid load in vivo. The lack of effect on the primary endpoint of the trial may be due to the fact that, as the authors point out, it was underpowered to show small differences in efficacy. Indeed, a larger sample size would have increased the ability to detect statistically significant differences, but this does not alter the notion that clinical effects may still be small and of limited relevance. In the case of the tarenflurbil trial, it is possible that the dose of 800 mg twice daily was still too low. The discrepant findings between the phase 2 subgroup analyses and the phase 3 study strongly caution against apparent overinterpretation of post hoc analyses.
The findings may also have implications for the amyloid hypothesis. First, it is possible that the relation between amyloid processing and AD is modified by the APOE genotype, and in this respect it will be interesting to see how a possible treatment effect may differ by APOE Ξµ4 status in the new phase 3 bapineuzumab study. It stresses again how important APOE is in several aspects of AD [13,14].
Second, as reduction of AΞ²42 was not effective and removal of aggregated AΞ² had a limited effect, other AΞ² species may be the main toxic agent in AD or the AD pathology may not depend on AΞ². Alternative models for AD pathophysiology may better explain how accumulation of AΞ²42 leads to tangle formation, and why tangle formation is closer to neuronal cell death than amyloid accumulation [2].
Third, reduction of AΞ² production or removal of AΞ² may not be successful in patients who already have a substantial amyloid burden if the cascade becomes independent of amyloid burden once AΞ²42 accumulation has set off an irreversible chain of events.
Finally, the amyloid hypothesis neglects the role of cerebrovascular damage, which is typically comorbid in older patients with AD, and may be a crucial cofactor in causing neurodegeneration and may interact with the pathology of AD [15]. Cerebrovascular damage is a factor that may have to be taken into account when developing new therapeutic strategies for AD.
</sections.4>

<sections.5>
Abbreviations
²: ²-amyloid; : lzheimer's disease; : apolipoprotein .Abbreviations
AΞ²: Ξ²-amyloid; AD: Alzheimer's disease; APOE: apolipoprotein E.
</sections.5>

<sections.6>
Competing interests
 has a senior fellowship at the lzheimer enter mc partly supported by ereniging .  is the recipient of a grant award from ristol-yers quibb and is a consultant to lan, yeth, ristol-yers quibb, yriad harmaceuticals and anone esearch.  has consulted for lan-yeth, ristol-yers quibb, yriad harmaceuticals, and anone esearch.Competing interests
NDP has a senior fellowship at the Alzheimer Center VUmc partly supported by Vereniging AEGON. PJV is the recipient of a grant award from Bristol-Myers Squibb and is a consultant to Elan, Wyeth, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Myriad Pharmaceuticals and Danone Research. PS has consulted for Elan-Wyeth, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Myriad Pharmaceuticals, and Danone Research.
</sections.6>

</text>
