<title>
A Novel Deletion Mutation of SLC16A2 Encoding Monocarboxylate Transporter (MCT) 8 in a 26-year-old Japanese Patient with Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome (AHDS), an X linked condition, is characterized by congenital hypotonia that progresses to spasticity with severe psychomotor delays, in combination with altered thyroid hormone levels, in particular, high serum T3 levels. Recently, this disease was proved to be caused by mutations in SLC16A2 coding for the monocarboxylate thyroid hormone transporter 8 (MCT8). Here we describe a 26-year -old Japanese patient with AHDS who had deletion of exon 3 of SLC16A2.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
llan-erndone-udley syndrome (;  309600) is one of the -linked mental retardation syndromes (1, 2). his syndrome is characterized by severe neurological deficits, and the markedly elevated serum 3 levels, low 4 levels, low reverse 3 levels, and borderline-high  levels (1, 2). eurological symptoms include central hypotonia with poor head control; spastic quadriplegia; inability to sit, stand, or walk independently; severe mental retardation; and absence of speech. he cause of  is mutations/deletions in 162 encoding one of the most specific and active thyroid hormone transporters, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (8) (1,2,3,4,5,6). hereafter, deletions, frameshift mutations and missense and nonsense mutations have been reported in more than 45 families (1, 2, 4,5,6,7,8).
ere we report a apanese patient with  due to a novel deletion of exon 3 in 162.Introduction
Allan-Herndone-Dudley syndrome (AHDS; MIM 309600) is one of the X-linked mental retardation syndromes (1, 2). This syndrome is characterized by severe neurological deficits, and the markedly elevated serum T3 levels, low T4 levels, low reverse T3 levels, and borderline-high TSH levels (1, 2). Neurological symptoms include central hypotonia with poor head control; spastic quadriplegia; inability to sit, stand, or walk independently; severe mental retardation; and absence of speech. The cause of AHDS is mutations/deletions in SLC16A2 encoding one of the most specific and active thyroid hormone transporters, monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) (1,2,3,4,5,6). Thereafter, deletions, frameshift mutations and missense and nonsense mutations have been reported in more than 45 families (1, 2, 4,5,6,7,8).
Here we report a Japanese patient with AHDS due to a novel deletion of exon 3 in SLC16A2.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Case eport
 male patient aged 26 yr was first referred to our hospital for gastrostomy due to malnutrition. etailed medical records were not available for the patient from several other hospitals. ccording to the limited medical records that were available and an interview with the patientβ€™s mother, the motherβ€™s pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. he patient was born at the gestational age of 41 wk, and there was no asphyxia. is birth weight was 3,150 g. is elder brother also showed severe psychomotor developmental delay of unknown origin, and died at 2 yr of age, but detailed information was also not obtained. he patient showed early onset of a neurological disorder. e has never been able to control his head or to sit, has shown few reactions to external stimuli and has little communication ability. t referral, his height was 143 cm and weight was 19.2 kg (=9.4 kg/m2). is neurological findings were severe intellectual disability, truncal hypotonia, limb hypertonia, hyperreflexia, and choreoathetoid movements of the face, trunk and extremities. e has never walked or spoke. e presented scoliosis, dorsal kyphosis, contractures of the knees and ankles and specific craniofacial features: elongated face with midface hypoplasia, prominent mandible and cupped, large ears. n addition, he had gastroesophageal reflux, leading to severe malnutrition. e had no goiter. he results of laboratory examinations were as follows: serum total protein 7.3 g/dl, serum albumin 3.8 g/dl,  21 /l,  13 /l, total cholesterol 106 ng/dl, triglyceride 34 mg/dl and blood urea nitrogen () 20.4 mg/dl. is serum triglyceride was below at the lower limit of the normal range, and his  was above the upper limit of the normal range. hyroid function tests showed a high free 3 level of 6.3 pg/ml (normal range, 2.1β€“4.1 pg/ml), low free 4 level of 0.4 ng/dl (normal range, 0.8β€“1.9 ng/dl), normal basal  level of 2.18 m. IU/ml (normal range. 0.4β€“4.0 mIU/ml) and no detectable thyroid autoantibodies in serum. Ultrasonography showed a homogeneous normal sized thyroid gland and no nodular changes. Serum TSH levels after thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) increased from 2.4 to 7.7 mIU/ml. His mother did not want further biological and radiological evaluation. Based on his clinical findings, thyroid hormone abnormality and family history, his presumed diagnosis was AHDS.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Methods
olecular studies were performed on the patient and his mother after informed consent was obtained from the patientβ€™s mother. enomic  was isolated from peripheral blood, and all exons of 162 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction using primers shown in igure 1ig. 1() chema of the 162 genomic organization and the location of  primers used in this study. rrows indicate primers for amplifying each exon. he two triangles in exons 2 and 4 indicate primers for amplification from exon 2 to exon 4. () lectrophoresis of  products of exon 3 using primers 3 and 3. xon 3 from the patientβ€™s genomic  was not amplified, but exon 3 from wild-type  was amplified. * and **, the same experiment was done twice. 1, 2 and 3 indicated three samples from different control wild-type genomic s. () lectrophoresis of  products using primers 2 and 4. ,  product from the patient. ,  product from the mother. ,  product from wild-type genomic . he patient showed an approximately 3.5 kb band. he mother showed two bands of approximately 4.5 and 3.5 kb. hese results indicated that the patient had a deletion of about 1 kb including exon 3 of 162. nly a band of approximately 4.5 kb band was amplified from wild-type genomic . and directly sequenced as previously described (2).Methods
Molecular studies were performed on the patient and his mother after informed consent was obtained from the patientβ€™s mother. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood, and all exons of SLC16A2 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction using primers shown in Figure 1AFig. 1(A) Schema of the SLC16A2 genomic organization and the location of PCR primers used in this study. Arrows indicate primers for amplifying each exon. The two triangles in exons 2 and 4 indicate primers for amplification from exon 2 to exon 4. (B) Electrophoresis of PCR products of exon 3 using primers 3F and 3R. Exon 3 from the patientβ€™s genomic DNA was not amplified, but exon 3 from wild-type DNA was amplified. P* and P**, the same experiment was done twice. C1, C2 and C3 indicated three samples from different control wild-type genomic DNAs. (C) Electrophoresis of PCR products using primers E2F and E4R. P, PCR product from the patient. M, PCR product from the mother. C, PCR product from wild-type genomic DNA. The patient showed an approximately 3.5 kb band. The mother showed two bands of approximately 4.5 and 3.5 kb. These results indicated that the patient had a deletion of about 1 kb including exon 3 of SLC16A2. Only a band of approximately 4.5 kb band was amplified from wild-type genomic DNA. and directly sequenced as previously described (2).
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Results
ll exons except exon 3 were successfully amplified, and there was no mutation. owever, exon 3 from the patientβ€™s  was not successfully amplified (ig. 1). herefore, we amplified a portion from exon 2 to exon 4 in 162 using a new primer set (2 and 4) (ig. 1).  amplified an approximately 4.5 kb fragment from wild-type  as expected, but approximately 3.5 kb band form the  of the patient. his result indicated that the patient had a partial deletion of 162 including exon 3 (ig. 1). nalysis of his mother showed two bands of approximately 4.5 and 3.5 kb, indicating a heterozygous carrier (ig. 1).Results
All exons except exon 3 were successfully amplified, and there was no mutation. However, exon 3 from the patientβ€™s DNA was not successfully amplified (Fig. 1B). Therefore, we amplified a portion from exon 2 to exon 4 in SLC16A2 using a new primer set (E2F and E4R) (Fig. 1A). PCR amplified an approximately 4.5 kb fragment from wild-type DNA as expected, but approximately 3.5 kb band form the DNA of the patient. This result indicated that the patient had a partial deletion of SLC16A2 including exon 3 (Fig. 1C). Analysis of his mother showed two bands of approximately 4.5 and 3.5 kb, indicating a heterozygous carrier (Fig. 1C).
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Discussion
e report a apanese patient with , who had deletion of exon 3 of 162.  analysis demonstrated that the patient had a hemizygous deletion of exon 3 of 162 and that his mother was a heterozygous carrier. lthough the functional consequence of this deletion was not determined in vitro, as exon 3 encodes 150 amino acids, mutant 8 is predicted to be nonfunctional. o far, frameshift, missense and nonsense mutations have been identified (1, 2, 4,5,6,7,8). n addition, deletion of exon 1, exon 2 to 4, exon 3 to 5, exon 6 and exon 2 to 6 has been reported (4). ince there is no hot spot for mutation, analysis of 162 in each patient with  is required to clarify a genetic defect.
ur case shows a very severe neurological phenotype, and all clinical features were concordant with those in other  patients, as reported in the literature (1, 2, 4,5,6,7,8); however, the definitive diagnosis in our case was delayed. ince it is difficult to distinguish  from patients with -linked mental retardation syndromes based on only the clinical and biochemical features (4, 5), thyroid hormone evaluation and subsequent genetic analysis of 162 is useful for diagnosis of .Discussion
We report a Japanese patient with AHDS, who had deletion of exon 3 of SLC16A2. PCR analysis demonstrated that the patient had a hemizygous deletion of exon 3 of SLC16A2 and that his mother was a heterozygous carrier. Although the functional consequence of this deletion was not determined in vitro, as exon 3 encodes 150 amino acids, mutant MCT8 is predicted to be nonfunctional. So far, frameshift, missense and nonsense mutations have been identified (1, 2, 4,5,6,7,8). In addition, deletion of exon 1, exon 2 to 4, exon 3 to 5, exon 6 and exon 2 to 6 has been reported (4). Since there is no hot spot for mutation, analysis of SLC16A2 in each patient with AHDS is required to clarify a genetic defect.
Our case shows a very severe neurological phenotype, and all clinical features were concordant with those in other AHDS patients, as reported in the literature (1, 2, 4,5,6,7,8); however, the definitive diagnosis in our case was delayed. Since it is difficult to distinguish AHDS from patients with X-linked mental retardation syndromes based on only the clinical and biochemical features (4, 5), thyroid hormone evaluation and subsequent genetic analysis of SLC16A2 is useful for diagnosis of AHDS.
</sections.4>

</text>
