<title>
Williams Syndrome
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
DISEASE CHARACTERISTICS: Williams syndrome (WS) is characterized by cardiovascular disease (elastin arteriopathy, peripheral pulmonary stenosis, supravalvar aortic stenosis, hypertension), distinctive facies, connective tissue abnormalities, intellectual disability (usually mild), a specific cognitive profile, unique personality characteristics, growth abnormalities, and endocrine abnormalities (hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, hypothyroidism, and early puberty). Feeding difficulties often lead to failure to thrive in infancy. Hypotonia and hyperextensible joints can result in delayed attainment of motor milestones. DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Clinical diagnostic criteria are available for Williams syndrome; however, the mainstay for diagnosis is detection of the contiguous gene deletion of the Williams-Beuren syndrome critical region (WBSCR) that encompasses the elastin gene (ELN). Over 99% of individuals with the clinical diagnosis of WS have this contiguous gene deletion, which can be detected using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and/or deletion/duplication testing. MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Early intervention programs, special education programs, and vocational training address developmental disabilities; programs include speech/language, physical, occupational, feeding, and sensory integration therapies. Psychological and psychiatric evaluation and treatment provide individualized behavioral counseling and medications, especially for attention deficit disorder and anxiety. Surgery may be required for supravalvar aortic or pulmonary artery stenosis, mitral valve insufficiency, and/or renal artery stenosis. Treatment of hypercalcemia may include diet modification, oral corticosteroids, and/or intravenous pamidronate. Refer to a nephrologist for management of nephrocalcinosis, persistent hypercalcemia, and/or hypercalciuria. Treatment of hypertension, hyperopia, and recurrent otitis media does not differ from that in the general population. Orothodontic referral should be considered for malocclusion. Infants with feeding problems may benefit from feeding therapy. Constipation should be aggressively managed at all ages. Early puberty may be treated with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist. Prevention of secondary complications: Range of motion exercises to prevent or ameliorate joint contractures; anesthesia consultation and electrocardiogram to screen for repolarization abnormalities prior to surgical procedures. Surveillance: Yearly medical evaluation, vision screening, hearing evaluation, measurement of blood pressure in both arms, measurement of calcium/creatinine ratio in a random spot urine, and urinalysis. Children under age two years should have serum calcium studies every four to six months. Additional periodic evaluations during childhood include: measurement of serum concentration of calcium every two years; assessment of thyroid function every three years; cardiology evaluation for elastin arteriopathy and long QT at least yearly for the first five years and every two to three years thereafter; and renal and bladder ultrasound examination every ten years. Periodic evaluations during adulthood include: oral glucose tolerance; cardiac evaluation for mitral valve prolapse, aortic insufficiency, and arterial stenosis; and ophthalmologic evaluation for cataracts. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Multivitamins for children because all pediatric multivitamin preparations contain vitamin D. GENETIC COUNSELING: Williams syndrome is transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner. Most cases are de novo occurrences, but occasionally, parent-to-child transmission is observed. Prenatal testing is possible but is rarely used because most cases occur in a single family member only; and no prenatal indicators exist for low-risk pregnancies.
</abstract>

</text>
