<title>
Small Molecules, Inhibitors of DNA-PK, Targeting DNA Repair, and Beyond.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Many current chemotherapies function by damaging genomic DNA in rapidly dividing cells ultimately leading to cell death. This therapeutic approach differentially targets cancer cells that generally display rapid cell division compared to normal tissue cells. However, although these treatments are initially effective in arresting tumor growth and reducing tumor burden, resistance and disease progression eventually occur. A major mechanism underlying this resistance is increased levels of cellular DNA repair. Most cells have complex mechanisms in place to repair DNA damage that occurs due to environmental exposures or normal metabolic processes. These systems, initially overwhelmed when faced with chemotherapy induced DNA damage, become more efficient under constant selective pressure and as a result chemotherapies become less effective. Thus, inhibiting DNA repair pathways using target specific small molecule inhibitors may overcome cellular resistance to DNA damaging chemotherapies. Non-homologous end joining a major mechanism for the repair of double-strand breaks (DSB) in DNA is regulated in part by the serine/threonine kinase, DNA dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). The DNA-PK holoenzyme acts as a scaffold protein tethering broken DNA ends and recruiting other repair molecules. It also has enzymatic activity that may be involved in DNA damage signaling. Because of its' central role in repair of DSBs, DNA-PK has been the focus of a number of small molecule studies. In these studies specific DNA-PK inhibitors have shown efficacy in synergizing chemotherapies in vitro. However, compounds currently known to specifically inhibit DNA-PK are limited by poor pharmacokinetics: these compounds have poor solubility and have high metabolic lability in vivo leading to short serum half-lives. Future improvement in DNA-PK inhibition will likely be achieved by designing new molecules based on the recently reported crystallographic structure of DNA-PK. Computer based drug design will not only assist in identifying novel functional moieties to replace the metabolically labile morpholino group but will also facilitate the design of molecules to target the DNA-PKcs/Ku80 interface or one of the autophosphorylation sites.
</abstract>

<sections.0>
Introduction
any first-line cancer therapies employ  damaging chemotherapeutic agents alone or in combination with ionizing radiation (; eymour et al., 2007; ardoso et al., 2009; ol et al., 2009; aftery and oldberg, 2010). hese therapies primarily target genomic  resulting in the formation of highly toxic double-strand  breaks (s) leading to cell cycle arrest and cell death. roblematic to cancer treatment, cells have multiple mechanisms for repairing s including homologous recombination (; ohnson and asin, 2001; ao et al., 2005; ung and lein, 2006) and non-homologous end joining (; urma et al., 2006; ieber et al., 2006; ennardo et al., 2008; ieber, 2008). , an error free repair process, depends on the availability of a homologous  template and, as such, functions primarily in the 2/ phase of the cell cycle when sister chromatids are in close proximity. , although error prone compared to , is thought to be the main pathway for the repair of  s. his pathway is able to function at all stages of the cell cycle and does not require the presence of a homologous template. he risk of mutation to an essential gene as a result of  is balanced by the benefit of avoiding catastrophic cell division in the presence of s. s such, it has been hypothesized that targeting the molecular machinery driving the  damage response (), particularly  and  repair, with small molecule inhibitors, will effectively enhance the efficacy of current cancer treatments that generate  damage.Introduction
Many first-line cancer therapies employ DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents alone or in combination with ionizing radiation (IR; Seymour et al., 2007; Cardoso et al., 2009; Tol et al., 2009; Raftery and Goldberg, 2010). These therapies primarily target genomic DNA resulting in the formation of highly toxic double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) leading to cell cycle arrest and cell death. Problematic to cancer treatment, cells have multiple mechanisms for repairing DSBs including homologous recombination (HR; Johnson and Jasin, 2001; Kao et al., 2005; Sung and Klein, 2006) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ; Burma et al., 2006; Lieber et al., 2006; Bennardo et al., 2008; Lieber, 2008). HR, an error free repair process, depends on the availability of a homologous DNA template and, as such, functions primarily in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle when sister chromatids are in close proximity. NHEJ, although error prone compared to HR, is thought to be the main pathway for the repair of DNA DSBs. This pathway is able to function at all stages of the cell cycle and does not require the presence of a homologous template. The risk of mutation to an essential gene as a result of NHEJ is balanced by the benefit of avoiding catastrophic cell division in the presence of DSBs. As such, it has been hypothesized that targeting the molecular machinery driving the DNA damage response (DDR), particularly NHEJ and DSB repair, with small molecule inhibitors, will effectively enhance the efficacy of current cancer treatments that generate DNA damage.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
D ependent rotein inase
ne such target,  dependent protein kinase (-), a nuclear serine/threonine kinase, is a critical protein facilitating  (urocher and ackson, 2001; ang et al., 2003, 2009; ollis et al., 2005; obbs et al., 2010; eal and eek, 2011; eal et al., 2011). he - holoenzyme is composed a regulatory heterodimer (u70 and u80 subunits) and a 460β€‰k. D catalytic component, DNA-PKcs. Based on amino acid sequence homology DNA-PK is a member of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase superfamily, however, since it possesses no apparent lipid kinase activity it has been classified along with Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM), Ataxia Telangiectasia and Rad3 Related (ATR), Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (m-Tor), and Suppressor of Morphogenesis in Genitalia-1 (SMG-1) as part of the phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase-like (PIKK) protein kinase group (Durocher and Jackson, 2001). Along with ATM and ATR, DNA-PK has a central function in the DSB response and collectively these three kinases are capable of phosphorylating upwards of 700 proteins (in vitro; Callen et al., 2009). DNA-PK itself is a target of ATM and ATR and is essential to NHEJ, V(D)J recombination and class switch recombination (Ma et al., 2002; Callen et al., 2009; Neal and Meek, 2011), all of which require the repair of DSBs. In vitro DNA-PKcs is activated by free DNA ends and is capable of phosphorylating several protein substrates including the Ku70/80 heterodimer, histone variant H2AX, replication associated protein A (RPA), and autophosphorylation (Stiff et al., 2004; Reitsema et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2005; Mukherjee et al., 2006; Koike et al., 2008; An et al., 2010). Furthermore, DNA-PK depended phosphorylation of S473 of AKT in response to platinum based chemotherapy has been shown to inhibit apoptotic response limiting drug efficacy (Stronack et al., 2011). There is also in vitro evidence that DNA-PK interacts with or influences p53 and p21 activities leading to cellular senescence and apoptosis (Azad et al., 2011; Rudolf et al., 2011; Stronack et al., 2011; Wei et al., 2012). Even so, only a few in vivo DNA-PK substrates are known, these include DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation and histone variant H2AX. H2AX phosphorylation on S139 (Ξ³H2AX) has been linked to Akt activity downstream of DNA-PK with S473 of Akt being phosphorylated by DNA-PK. In response to this phosphorylation GSK3Ξ², a negative regulator of DNA-PK, is phosphorylated on Ser9 which prevents GSK3Ξ² from dephosphorylating Ξ³H2AX (An et al., 2010). Despite the small number of substrates identified in vivo DNA-PK kinase activity is essential to efficient DSB repair as only wild type and not kinase dead enzyme can rescue IR sensitivity in DNA-PKcs defective V3 cells (Chen et al., 2005). Furthermore, cells displaying resistance to DNA damaging agents had increased levels of DNA-PKcs activity and cells deficient in DNA-PKcs had enhanced sensitivity to DNA damaging agents (Soubeyrand et al., 2003; Shinohara et al., 2005; Morris et al., 2011). Also, although phosphorylation of DNA-PK and DNA-PK kinase activity are not required for initial recruitment to DNA damage sites they are required for efficient repair of DSBs (Davis et al., 2010). It has been proposed that DNA-PK functions as a scaffolding protein to align the broken DNA ends and assist in the localization of repair factors. It may also play a regulatory role by physically blocking unrepaired DNA ends preventing their degradation, then, through autophosphorylation, releasing them for repair once proper alignment has been achieved (Neal and Meek, 2011; Neal et al., 2011).
Of note, a recent review by Kong et al. (2011) discusses physiological functions of DNA-PK beyond itsβ€™ role in DNA repair.
These authors note that the abundant expression of the large DNA-PK protein molecule in numerous cell types does not impart improved DNA repair abilities, suggesting other important functions for this molecule may exist. Evidence presented suggests that DNA-PK has important roles in regulating gene response to feeding/insulin stimulation. Furthermore, it is suggested that DNA-PK has an active part in the regulation of homeostasis of cell proliferation. Given that cancer cells generally have a high rate of proliferation and have a high rate of metabolic activity these additional functions suggest further mechanisms by which DNA-PK inhibition can target cancer cells.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Mechanism
egarding the role of - in  repair a recent model of  was proposed by eal and eek (2011) that suggests  repair is initiated when the regulatory component of -, u70/u80, comes in contact with  ends at  sites. he u heterodimer, which is able to bind to various double-stranded end structures (blunt ends, 3β€² or 5β€² overhangs, covalently closed hairpins) in a sequence independent manner, forms an asymmetric ring that encircles double-stranded  ends. ubsequently, -cs is recruited and binds to the -terminal portion of u80 (orris et al., 2011).  bound u then translocates inwards away from the broken end significantly stimulating the kinase activity of -cs. t is proposed that homo-dimeric interaction of  bound - complexes brings corresponding broken ends into close proximity and subsequently acts as a scaffold for recruiting downstream repair proteins such as 4,  ligase , rtemis, , and aprataxin. ctivity of this larger protein complex ultimately results in the repair of s (uo et al., 2006; ansour et al., 2008). olecular models of - associated  repair have been reviewed in detail by hompson (2012). he initial step of  repair occurs rapidly with both  and - being recruited to  damage sites. - is recruited within 60β€‰s and recruitment peaks after 10β€‰min. n contrast  recruitment peaks after 20β€‰min. - rapidly dissociates after reaching peak levels and in contrast  lingers for a prolonged period. issociation of -, , and other  repair factors from  sites is associated with the resolution of ³2 foci suggesting successful  repair. n contrast, - showed persistent localization in  deficient cells (ematsu et al., 2007). hese data suggest a model where - and  hold separate and distinct functions in  repair with - functioning as a scaffold and  acting as a signaling kinase.Mechanism
Regarding the role of DNA-PK in DNA repair a recent model of NHEJ was proposed by Neal and Meek (2011) that suggests DSB repair is initiated when the regulatory component of DNA-PK, Ku70/Ku80, comes in contact with DNA ends at DSB sites. The Ku heterodimer, which is able to bind to various double-stranded end structures (blunt ends, 3β€² or 5β€² overhangs, covalently closed hairpins) in a sequence independent manner, forms an asymmetric ring that encircles double-stranded DNA ends. Subsequently, DNA-PKcs is recruited and binds to the C-terminal portion of Ku80 (Morris et al., 2011). DNA bound Ku then translocates inwards away from the broken end significantly stimulating the kinase activity of DNA-PKcs. It is proposed that homo-dimeric interaction of DNA bound DNA-PK complexes brings corresponding broken ends into close proximity and subsequently acts as a scaffold for recruiting downstream repair proteins such as XRCC4, DNA ligase IV, Artemis, XLF, and aprataxin. Activity of this larger protein complex ultimately results in the repair of DSBs (Kuo et al., 2006; Mansour et al., 2008). Molecular models of DNA-PK associated DSB repair have been reviewed in detail by Thompson (2012). The initial step of DSB repair occurs rapidly with both ATM and DNA-PK being recruited to DNA damage sites. DNA-PK is recruited within 60β€‰s and recruitment peaks after 10β€‰min. In contrast ATM recruitment peaks after 20β€‰min. DNA-PK rapidly dissociates after reaching peak levels and in contrast ATM lingers for a prolonged period. Dissociation of DNA-PK, ATM, and other DNA repair factors from DSB sites is associated with the resolution of Ξ³H2AX foci suggesting successful DSB repair. In contrast, DNA-PK showed persistent localization in NHEJ deficient cells (Uematsu et al., 2007). These data suggest a model where DNA-PK and ATM hold separate and distinct functions in DSB repair with DNA-PK functioning as a scaffold and ATM acting as a signaling kinase.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
Phosphorylation
 dependent protein kinase is clearly important for efficient repair of s and to date as many as 40 potential phosphorylation sites have been identified on - with the majority of these being located in two major clusters: (1) the  cluster containing 2612, 2624, 2609, 2620, 2638, 2647 and 2) the  cluster containing sites 2023, 2029, 2041, 2053, and 2056 (orris et al., 2011; eal and eek, 2011; eal et al., 2011). echanistically, experimental evidence suggests that unphosphorylated - blocks  ends inhibiting efficient ligation and that autophosphorylation generates a large conformational change opening the structure of - (avis et al., 2010; orris et al., 2011) releasing it from aligned  ends. or example, cells expressing mutations at 2056 or 2609 have tight binding of - to  s and a slow off rate at sites of  damage (avis et al., 2010). he structure of the -cs molecule has three major domains facilitating this functionality: a kinase domain, a large -terminal domain that includes two long arms into which  is proposed to thread and a  binding pocket. he phosphorylations of amino acids from the respective clusters, 2056 () and 2609 (), are likely distinctly regulated events as the physical locations of these residues are far apart (hen et al., 2005). urthermore, phosphorylations of these clusters may be functionally distinct in that  and  clusters were shown to regulate  end processing and  repair pathway choice in a reciprocal manner. or example, blocking at the amino acid cluster  inhibited end processing and  while blocking at the  cluster enhanced these processes. dditionally, it was observed that 2056 phosphorylation increased incrementally and reached maximum levels at 50β€‰y of . his was in contrast to 2609 whose phosphorylation reached maximum levels at 10β€‰y. ased on the use of  and - knockout cell lines and - and  specific si. RNAs, it was proposed that the S2056 phosphorylation is an autophosphorylation event that occurs in trans while the T2609 phosphorylation is at least in part due to ATM activity (Collis et al., 2005). Further examining the role of autophosphorylation, Neal and Meek (Neal and Meek, 2011; Neal et al., 2011) noted that DNA-PK a relatively abundant protein inhibits the process of HR in a titratable manner. They also noted that this inhibition is absolutely dependent on itsβ€™ enzymatic activity and is distinctly modulated by phosphorylation. Through extensive examination of various phosphorylation sites they observed that some sites impact NHEJ negatively while promoting HR. They concluded that failed NHEJ results in increased HR and conversely that in most cases proficient NHEJ inhibits HR. In summary current data suggests that DNA-PK has two important phosphorylation sites: (1) a cluster containing S2056 that is primarily autophosphorylated and (2) a cluster containing sites T2609 and T2647 that are at least in part phosphorylated by ATM. Phosphorylation at these sites is critical as its absence results in retention of DNA-PK foci at damage sites for longer periods. All of these together illustrate the potential for blocking DNA repair by inhibiting DNA-PK phosphorylation. Thus there is vast potential for the use of DNA-PK inhibitors in enhancing DNA damaging chemotherapies.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
D- nhibitors
s such, to date the most successful approach to - inhibition has been with small molecules that target the  binding site of the kinase domain (llen et al., 2003). arious investigators using compound libraries have identified a small group of molecules that effectively inhibit - kinase activity (igure 1). owever, despite their specificity and potency these molecules have been hampered by poor pharmacokinetic properties.
igure 1mall molecule inhibitors of -: () wortmannin, () 294002 derivatives, and () other molecules with demonstrated inhibitory activity.ne of the first identified inhibitors, wortmannin (1), a furanosteroid metabolite of the fungi enicillium funiculosum, has been used experimentally to inhibit -. t is a non-competitive general inhibitor of -3 kinases and has an 50 in the nanomolar range (5β€‰n. M for PI3K and equipotent for DNA-PK). Itsβ€™ mode of action involves the irreversible alkylation of lysine 802, an amino acid residing in the active site of DNA-PKcs that is critical for the phosphate transfer reaction. Experimentally wortmannin has proven to be an effective radiosensitizer with a dose reduction factor (DRF) for IR at 10% survival between 1.4 and 3. Despite itsβ€™ experimental efficacy: lack of specificity, poor solubility in aqueous solution, and in vivo toxicity limit clinical application of this compound (Collis et al., 2005).
LY294002 (2), a morpholine derivative of the plant flavonoid quercetin, is also a non-specific DNA-PK inhibitor used in many studies (Vlahos et al., 1994; Sauveur-Michel et al., 2009). It is a competitive inhibitor that binds reversibly to the kinase domain of DNA-PK with an IC50 of 1.4β€‰ΞΌM producing a DRF at 10% survival with IR of 1.5β€“1.8 (Collis et al., 2005). Rapid metabolic clearance (1β€‰h), in vivo toxicity, and lack of specificity make clinical evaluation unfeasible in humans. However, LY294002 has proven to be a productive lead compound and biochemical modifications have produced a series of compounds with more favorable properties (Fuhrman et al., 2008; Clapham et al., 2011). These modifications using LY294002 as template have improved specificity with regards to DNA-PK inhibition (Ihmaid et al., 2011).
One such compound NU7026 (3) was over 50 fold more selective for DNA-PK than other PI-3Ks including ATM and ATR. NU7026 had an IC50 of 0.23β€‰ΞΌM for DNA-PK, 13β€‰ΞΌM for PI3K, and >100β€‰ΞΌM for ATM or ATR (Peddi et al., 2010). Furthermore, this drug potentiated the growth inhibition of a variety of chemotherapeutic agents including: idarubicin, daunorubicin, doxorubicin, etoposide, amsacrine, mitoxantrone but did not potentiate camptothecin or cytosine arabinoside (Willmore et al., 2004). Cell based assays showed a DRF for this drug with IR at 10% survival of mouse embryonic fibroblasts of 1.5 (Nutley et al., 2005). However, metabolic lability remains problematic as monohydroxylation occurs on position 2 of the morpholino group resulting in opening of the morpholino ring. Thus it is not likely that sufficiently high concentrations of this drug can be obtained in patients over the 4β€‰h period required to synergize radiation and or chemotherapy. Furthermore, poor solubility in saline solutions limits the use of osmotic mini pumps. It has been suggested that the 2-morpholin-4-yl substituent is required for inhibitory activity. As such attempts have been made to maintain this structure while modifying other parts of the molecule to improve pharmacokinetics. Problematically the core ring structure is not conducive to chemical modifications. As such, Hollick et al. proposed modification of pyran-4-ones and thiopyran-4-ones and obtained suitably potent and selective DNA-PK inhibitors. Although this approach obtained novel compounds screening continues to identify compounds with improved biological and pharmaceutical properties (Hollick et al., 2003).
NU7441 (4) another drug based on the LY294002 backbone with improved potency showed similar promise to NU7026. In cell lines it showed strong inhibition of DNA-PK with an IC50 of 0.3β€‰ΞΌM for DNA-PK and 7β€‰ΞΌM for PI3K. In the presence of this compound doxorubicin and IR induced DSBs persisted for prolonged periods and HR activity increased modestly (Rad51 foci; Tavecchio et al., 2012). Zhao and Curtin (Zhao et al., 2006) noted that NU7441 increased the cytotoxicity of IR and etoposide in SW620, LoVo, and V3-YAC colon cancer cells but not in V3 cells indicating that potentiation of DNA damage and cell death was largely due to DNA-PK inhibition. Furthermore, NU7441 substantially delayed the repair of IR and etoposide induced DSBs and appreciably increased G2/M accumulation associated with IR, etoposide and doxorubicin in SW620, and LoVo colon cancer cells. In xenograft colon cancer models NU7441 concentrations in the tumor necessary for chemopotentiation in vitro were maintained for at least 4β€‰h at non-toxic doses, a significant improvement over NU7026. Additionally, etoposide induced tumor growth delay was increased two-fold without enhancing toxicity. Thus experiments with NU7441 have shown that pharmacokinetics of these inhibitors can be improved but their marginal effects on radiation and chemotherapy have halted further development.
Other compounds based on the LY294002 structure have been tested including IC86621 (5), IC87102 (6), and IC87361 (7). In cell culture these recapitulate the phenotype of DNA-PK defective cell lines including those from SCID mice and directly inhibit the repair of DNA DSBs and enhance the cytotoxicity of physical and chemical agents that induce DSB formation. As with other compounds tested IC86621 showed increased sensitization to IR and decreased repair of spontaneous and IR induced DSBs. Since, these compounds are non-toxic there main therapeutic potential is to enhance the effects of DNA damaging therapies on cancer cells (Kashishian et al., 2003). DNA-PKcs was strongly inhibited and even at concentrations of 100β€‰ΞΌM, IC86621 had no activity against the closely related protein kinases ATM, ATR, or FRAP. Additionally, IC87361 showed significant radiosensitization at 6β€‰Gy and significant growth delay in xenograft models. At 10β€‰ΞΌM concentrations this drug had no intrinsic growth inhibitory properties but significantly potentiated the effect of radiation in ovarian cancer cells. It was observed that at least 4β€‰h exposure to a 10β€‰ΞΌM concentration of this drug was required for radiosensitization and that 24β€‰h of exposure further improved this effect. This time of drug exposure is likely to be important for positive therapeutic effects and illustrates that pharmacokinetic properties such as: rapid clearance from circulation and low bioavailability (Shinohara et al., 2005) are the major barriers to the clinical use of these compounds.
Other compounds based on different chemical structures and found to have inhibitory activity against DNA-PK include OK-1035 (8) and SU11752 (9). OK-1035 with an IC50 for DNA-PK of 100β€‰ΞΌM is unlikely to be a useful drug in vivo (Take et al., 1996). Similarly, SU11752 was shown to lack the required potency for in vivo studies.
The phenolic aldehyde vanillin (10), derived from some species of vanilla pods, has also been shown to inhibit DNA-PK in cell free extracts. This inhibition was shown to be specific to NHEJ and selective for DNA-PK over ATM and ATR with a DRF of 1.3 at 10% survival following IR of human ovarian carcinoma cells (Durant and Karran, 2003).
Recently the anticancer agent NK314 (11), possessing activity against topoisomerase II alpha (TIIΞ±), was shown to induce the degradation of DNA-PKcs resulting in impaired DNA DSB repair. In other words NK314 appears to be an inhibitor with dual specificities for TIIΞ± and DNA-PKcs with potential activity against adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma (ATL; Hisatomi et al., 2011). Although the mechanism by which this drug inhibits DNA-PK remains unclear it illustrates the potential for combining DNA-PK activity with chemotherapeutics. The combination is in this case all the more effective because the two activities are delivered as a single reagent. This drug is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of ATL illustrating the potential for using DNA-PK inhibitors in the clinic.
Recent studies in our laboratory have explored the efficacy of acridone based compounds as DNA-PK inhibitors (Davidson et al., 2012a,b). These studies sought to measure the degree of synergy induced by the specific small molecule inhibitor of DNA-PK, IC486241 (ICC) (12), with irinotecan (SN38) or oxaliplatin. Significant reductions in the IC50 values of SN38 were observed at 5 and 10β€‰ΞΌM of DNA-PK inhibitors. Moreover, at 1β€“2β€‰ΞΌM (attainable concentrations with ICC in mice), these DNA-PKcs inhibitors demonstrated synergistic reductions in the IC50 of SN38. Flow cytometric data indicated that SN38 and SN38 in combination with DNA-PKcs inhibitors showed dramatic G2/M arrest at 24β€‰h. Furthermore, reduced phosphorylation of DNA-PKcs and increased DNA damage were observed at this time point with SN38 in combination with DNA-PKcs inhibitors as compared to cells treated with SN38 alone. SN38 alone and in the presence of ICC increased nuclear Rad51 protein levels. Furthermore, inhibition of DNA-PKcs increased HRR suggesting that NHEJ is a negative regulator of HRR. This observation was corroborated by Neal et al. (2011), who showed that DNA-PK enzymatic activity could inhibit HRR in a titratable fashion. In addition these authors also showed that some phosphorylations of DNA-PK had the opposite effect, that is to say, inhibition of NHEJ and promotion of HRR. Of interest, Amrein et al. (2011) observed a similar relationship between the HRR and NHEJ pathways in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) lymphocytes treated with chlorambucil (CLB). Imatinib and Nilotinib, two potent inhibitors of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase c-abl, caused a reduction in HRR and a corresponding increase in DNA-PK (NHEJ) activity. Together these observations suggest that DNA-PK has a significant function in choosing the pathway of DNA repair. A similar series of experiments showed the degree to which ICC synergizes the cytotoxicity of DNA damaging agents in three genetically diverse breast cancer cell lines. In this study, improved cytotoxicity and significant synergy were observed with both anticancer agents in the presence of non-toxic concentrations of ICC. Moreover, ICC decreased doxorubicin-induced DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation on Ser2056 and increased doxorubicin-induced DNA fragmentation. Thus, the novel DNA-PKcs inhibitor, ICC, synergistically sensitized 3 breast cancer cell lines to doxorubicin and cisplatin. Enhanced efficacy of doxorubicin was achieved by inhibiting NHEJ resulting in increased accumulation of DNA damage. Pharmacokinetic studies of these compounds in mice showed maximum serum concentrations of 4.6β€‰ΞΌM 1β€‰min post intravenous injection and terminal serum half-lives of 23.8β€‰min (personal communication, Luipold pharmaceuticals). Thus although this drug shows promising synergy with chemotherapeutics in cell culture, future use will depend on developing compounds with improved solubility and serum half-life.
</sections.4>

<sections.5>
Nucleotide and ntibody nhibitors
lthough the majority of studies have focused on the use of small organic compounds to inhibit -, a few have focused on nucleotide and antibody based inhibitors and shown that these may also have clinical efficacy in the inhibition of -. n fact due to the biological nature of these molecules they may overcome the two primary obstacles faced by small organic compounds known to inhibit -, namely: poor solubilityβ€™s and short serum half-lives. 163 (metelstat; ), a 13-mer oligonucleotide developed as a direct inhibitor of the telomerase active site illustrates how nucleotides can influence - function. n a recent study in  lymphocytes this molecule was shown to inhibit - phosphorylation and increase 2 phosphorylation in response to treatment with the nucleotide analog fludarabine (flu; hawi et al., 2011). he authors observed that activity was correlated with low expression levels of the - subunit u80 and that  inhibited - phosphorylation at a level equivalent to 7026. ogether these observations indicate that  in addition to inhibiting telomerase activity enhances chemotherapy by inhibiting - activity and repair of  damage. t would be of significant interest to know if  synergizes the killing of other cancer types in the presence of a variety of  damaging therapies.
n addition to oligonucleotides, antibody based inhibitors may also have a role to play in - inhibition. ntibodies, although effective in the inhibition of cell surface targets (cott, 2012) are typically ineffective against intracellular targets because of their inability to penetrate the plasma membrane (ardinale and iocca, 2008). owever, recent work in which the - specific single-chain antibody variable region fragment c. Fv 18-2 was linked to folate via a scissile disulfide linker showed efficacy in delivering the antibody fragment to cell nuclei via folate mediated endocytosis. This product resulted in decreased DNA-PK phosphorylation, increased H2AX phosphorylation, and radiosensitization (Xiong et al., 2011). This work is of interested for a number of reasons. Firstly, it illustrates the potential of antibody based therapies that target intracellular molecules such as DNA-PK and secondly it illustrates the efficacy of combi-molecules composed of a cell surface receptor substrate and a chemotherapeutic agent. The receptor substrate as in this case can facilitate transit of the plasma and nuclear membranes but may also be used to target drugs to cancers over-expressing specific surface receptors.
In conclusion DNA-PK inhibition using small molecule inhibitors holds promise for improving cancer therapy. However, molecules currently known to specifically inhibit DNA-PK are limited by poor pharmacokinetics: metabolic lability leads to a short serum half-life. Future improvement in DNA-PK inhibition will likely be achieved by designing new molecules based on the recently reported crystallographic structure of DNA-PK (Sibanda et al., 2010; Ihmaid et al., 2012). Computer based drug design will not only assist in identifying novel functional moieties to replace the metabolically labile morpholino group but will also facilitate the design of molecules to target the DNA-PKcs/Ku80 interface or one of the autophosphorylation sites. Of significant interest novel approaches using DNA-PK specific antibodies or oligonucleotides may also be of great value as they may overcome the fundamental weaknesses of currently available small molecule inhibitors of DNA-PK, namely: poor solubility and short serum half-life. To date the latter have only been tested against DNA-PK in vitro, future work will demonstrate if these approaches have significant in vivo efficacy.
</sections.5>

<sections.6>
Conflict of nterest tatement
he authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
</sections.6>

</text>
