<title>
The sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor EDG-1 is essential for platelet-derived growth factor-induced cell motility.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
EDG-1, encoded by the endothelial differentiation gene-1, is a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide binding protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for sphingosine-1-phosphate (SPP) that has been shown to stimulate angiogenesis and cell migration in cultured endothelial cells. Unexpectedly, EDG-1 knockout embryos had a normal blood vessel network, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, but died in utero owing to massive haemorrhaging as a result of failure of smooth muscle cells and pericytes to migrate around the circumference and reinforce endothelial tubes [Liu, Wada, Yamashita, Mi, Deng, Hobson, Rosenfeldt, Nava, Chae, Lee, et al. (2000) J. Clin. Invest. 106, 951-961]. This vascular maturation defect is similar to the phenotype of mice homozygous for disrupted alleles of platelet-derived growth factor B-subunit homodimer (PDGF-BB) or its receptor PDGFR-beta. We found that fibroblasts from EDG-1 null embryos did not migrate toward PDGF or SPP, and inhibition of motility correlated with defective activation of the small guanosine triphosphatase Rac, which is required for lamellipodia formation and directional locomotion [Hobson, Rosenfeldt, Barak, Olivera, Poulton, Caron, Milstien, and Spiegel (2001) Science 291, 1800-1803]. Moreover, we showed that PDGF-directed cell migration requires both sphingosine kinase activation and expression of EDG-1, suggesting a functional link between PDGF signalling and EDG-1. Indeed, treatment of wild-type cells with PDGF transactivated EDG-1 as determined by translocation of beta-arrestin and phosphorylation of EDG-1. These findings reveal a new paradigm for receptor cross-communication in which activation of a GPCR by a receptor tyrosine kinase is critical for cell motility. Our observations might also clarify the role of EDG-1 in vascular maturation and angiogenesis.
</abstract>

</text>
