<title>
Alphaviruses (Togaviridae) and Flaviviruses (Flaviviridae)
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
At least 27 alphaviruses and 68 flaviviruses have been recognized, approximately one-third of which are medically important human pathogens. They vary widely in their basic ecology; each virus occupies a distinct ecologic niche, often with restricted geographic and biologic distribution. As shown in Tables 54-1 and 54-2, alphaviruses and flaviviruses can cause various syndromes, ranging from benign febrile illnesses to severe systemic diseases with hemorrhagic manifestations or major organ involvement. The neurotropic alphaviruses and flaviviruses can produce severe destructive central nervous system disease with serious sequelae. Several alphaviruses (chikungunya, Mayaro, and Ross River) cause painful arthritis that persists for weeks or months after the initial febrile illness. Yellow fever virus has unique hepatotropic properties that cause a clinically and pathologically distinct form of hepatitis with a hemorrhagic diathesis. The dengue viruses, which cause more human illness than all other members of their family, may produce a serious, sometimes fatal, immunopathologic disease in which shock and hemorrhage occur. Hepatitis C virus (Chapter 70) may be a flavivirus. Alphavirus is one of the two genera in the family Togaviridae; the other genus (Rubivirus) has rubella virus (Chapter 55) as its only member. Flavivirus, once classified in the Togaviridae, now constitutes one of three genera in the family Flaviviridae; the other two genera are Pestivirus and “Hepatitis C-like viruses”. Pestivirus includes animal pathogens (bovine viral diarrhea and hog cholera viruses) that are of considerable economic importance, but contains no known human pathogens. Hepatitis C virus is described in Chapter 70. All alphaviruses and flaviviruses that cause disease in humans are arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses). In the original classification scheme based on antigenic relationships, alphaviruses and flaviviruses were termed group A and group B arboviruses, respectively. Most alphaviruses and flaviviruses survive in nature by replicating alternately in a vertebrate host and a hematophagous arthropod (mosquitoes or, for some flaviviruses, ticks). Arthropod vectors acquire the viral infection by biting a viremic host, and after an extrinsic incubation period during which the virus replicates in the vector's tissues, they transmit virus through salivary secretions to another vertebrate host. Virus replicates in the vertebrate host, causing viremia and sometimes illness. The ability to infect and replicate in both vertebrate and arthropod cells is an essential quality of alphaviruses and flaviviruses. The principal vertebrate hosts for most are various species of wild mammals or birds. The natural zoonotic cycles that maintain the virus do not usually involve humans. However, a few viruses (yellow fever virus, dengue virus types 1, 2, 3 and 4 and chikungunya virus) can be transmitted in a human-mosquito-human cycle. As a result of being pathogenic for humans and capable of transmission in heavily populated areas, these viruses can cause widespread and serious epidemics. Because of their high transmission potential, these viruses are major public health problems in many tropical and subtropical regions of the world where appropriate mosquito vectors are present. Because some of these agents are dangerous human pathogens and are highly infectious, special containment and safety precautions in the laboratory are required.
</abstract>

</text>
