<title>
Global brain delivery of neprilysin gene by intravascular administration of AAV vector in mice.
</title>

<text>

<sections.0>
Aggregation and deposition of amyloid-² peptide (²) in the brain are triggering events of the long-term pathological cascade of lzheimer's disease (), and are closely associated with the metabolic balance between ² anabolic and catabolic activities12. s almost all familial  mutations cause an increase in the anabolism of a particular form of ², ²1-42, leading to ² deposition and accelerating  pathology, a chronic reduction in the catabolic activity would also promote ² deposition12. eprilysin ( 3.4.24.11) is a rate-limiting peptidase involved in brain ² catabolism, as proven by in vivo experiments tracing the catabolism of radiolabeled ² in brain and by reverse genetics studies for candidate peptidases in mice34. eprilysin gene-disruption caused a gene dosage-dependent elevation of endogenous ² levels in mouse brain, suggesting that a subtle but long-term reduction in neprilysin activity would contribute to  development by promoting accumulation of ²2.Aggregation and deposition of amyloid-Ξ² peptide (AΞ²) in the brain are triggering events of the long-term pathological cascade of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and are closely associated with the metabolic balance between AΞ² anabolic and catabolic activities12. As almost all familial AD mutations cause an increase in the anabolism of a particular form of AΞ², AΞ²1-42, leading to AΞ² deposition and accelerating AD pathology, a chronic reduction in the catabolic activity would also promote AΞ² deposition12. Neprilysin (EC 3.4.24.11) is a rate-limiting peptidase involved in brain AΞ² catabolism, as proven by in vivo experiments tracing the catabolism of radiolabeled AΞ² in brain and by reverse genetics studies for candidate peptidases in mice34. Neprilysin gene-disruption caused a gene dosage-dependent elevation of endogenous AΞ² levels in mouse brain, suggesting that a subtle but long-term reduction in neprilysin activity would contribute to AD development by promoting accumulation of AΞ²2.
</sections.0>

<sections.1>
Mounting evidence that expression levels of neprilysin are decreased in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of  patients from the early stages of disease development and also with aging in humans, as well as mice, suggests a close association of neprilysin with the etiology and pathogenesis of 2. ndeed, reduced activity of neprilysin in mouse brain elevates the levels of highly toxic ² oligomers at the synapses, and leads to impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity and cognitive function even before apparent amyloid deposition is observed in the brain5. hus, a decline in neprilysin activity appears to be at least partly responsible for the memory-related symptoms of , and up-regulation of neprilysin is considered to be a promising strategy for therapy and prevention of .Mounting evidence that expression levels of neprilysin are decreased in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex of AD patients from the early stages of disease development and also with aging in humans, as well as mice, suggests a close association of neprilysin with the etiology and pathogenesis of AD2. Indeed, reduced activity of neprilysin in mouse brain elevates the levels of highly toxic AΞ² oligomers at the synapses, and leads to impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity and cognitive function even before apparent amyloid deposition is observed in the brain5. Thus, a decline in neprilysin activity appears to be at least partly responsible for the memory-related symptoms of AD, and up-regulation of neprilysin is considered to be a promising strategy for therapy and prevention of AD.
</sections.1>

<sections.2>
Experimental gene therapy to transfer neprilysin gene into the brains of  model mice has been reported, and for this purpose various kinds of recombinant viral vectors carrying wild-type neprilysin or its variants that are truncated at the transmembrane region and can be released to extracellular space have been utilized67. iral vector-mediated delivery of neprilysin gene successfully retarded amyloid deposition in the brains of  model mice67. eneficial potential of gene therapy has also been shown in other neurodegenerative diseases, including arkinson's disease (). ene transfer of dopamine-synthesizing enzymes into the putamen alleviated motor symptoms in  patients89. owever, infusion of viral vectors via stereotaxic surgery is not necessarily appropriate if the therapeutic gene should be delivered to broad areas of the brain.Experimental gene therapy to transfer neprilysin gene into the brains of AD model mice has been reported, and for this purpose various kinds of recombinant viral vectors carrying wild-type neprilysin or its variants that are truncated at the transmembrane region and can be released to extracellular space have been utilized67. Viral vector-mediated delivery of neprilysin gene successfully retarded amyloid deposition in the brains of AD model mice67. Beneficial potential of gene therapy has also been shown in other neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD). Gene transfer of dopamine-synthesizing enzymes into the putamen alleviated motor symptoms in PD patients89. However, infusion of viral vectors via stereotaxic surgery is not necessarily appropriate if the therapeutic gene should be delivered to broad areas of the brain.
</sections.2>

<sections.3>
In this study we have successfully developed a new gene delivery system by employing the combination of r. AAV9 with a neuron-specific promoter, and we have shown that this system can provide functional gene expression throughout the brains of mice after intracardiac administration. The AAV vector can achieve comprehensive gene expression of neprilysin in the brain of young neprilysin-deficient mice, eventually decelerating AΞ² accumulation and alleviating cognitive dysfunction based on a water maze test in aged APP transgenic (tg) mice. We show that the majority of the exogenous neprilysin is localized in late and early endosomes, where newly generated AΞ² is concentrated, and this may be the reason why AΞ² can be effectively excluded from the brain.
</sections.3>

<sections.4>
Results
xpression profile of neprilysin in the brain after -mediated gene transfer. To deliver an AAV vector from circulating blood to the brain, we employed intracardiac administration, i.e., injection into the left ventricle of the heart, because this provides a direct route to the brain. To evaluate gene expression of neprilysin, we injected rAAV9 vectors that encode either an active or an inactive form of neprilysin in neprilysin-deficient mice10 and examined the outcome by means of specific immunochemical staining for neprilysin. This staining generated specific signals of endogenous neprilysin in wild-type mice, but not in neprilysin-deficient mice without vector treatment (Fig. 1a,b). Expression of exogenous neprilysin after a single injection of rAAV9-NEP vector (4 Γ— 1011 vector genome [v.g.]) into the left ventricle of the heart of neprilysin-deficient mice was spread over the limbic region on the neprilysin-null background (Fig. 1c,d), and presented a scattered distribution, but with locally intense signals. The total amount of exogenous neprilysin expression was dependent on amount of vector injected into the mice over a range of 0.5β€“4.0 Γ— 1011β€…v.g., as far as we examined (data not shown). On the other hand, intracardiac administration of rAAV9-NEP vector did not cause prominent gene expression of neprilysin in heart, lung, kidney or liver (Supplementary Fig. 1).Next, we examined the localization of neprilysin in the brain by confocal double immunostaining for neprilyin and several marker proteins, after the injection of rAAV9-NEP vector into neprilysin-deficient mice. Neprilysin was present in vesicular structures of NeuN-positive neurons (Fig. 2aβ€“c), but not in glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive astrocytes (data not shown). In addition, we found that exogenous neprilysin is colocalized with late endosomal marker proteins Ras-related protein 7 (Rab7) (Fig. 2dβ€“f) and Rab9 (Fig. 2gβ€“i), and also in part with early endosomal markers Rab5 (Fig. 2jβ€“l) and early endosome antigen 1 protein (EEA1) (Fig. 2mβ€“o), but not with presynaptic markers SV2 (Fig. 2pβ€“r) and syntaxin 1, secretory vesicle marker Rab3a, clathrin-coated vesicle marker clathrin heavy chain, somato-dendritic marker microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), or postsynaptic marker PSD-95 (data not shown).Functional expression of neprilysinWe investigated functional expression of neprilysin and subsequent reduction of AΞ² levels in the brain. Four weeks after the single intracardiac injection of rAAV-NEPWT vector into neprilysin-deficient mice, neprilysin activity in the limbic region including the neocortex and hippocampus was significantly increased compared to that after injection of rAAV-NEPMT vector, although the increased level of neprilysin activity was less than 10% of the level observed in intact wild-type mice (Fig. 3). The injection of rAAV-NEPWT vector into neprilysin-deficient mice significantly reduced AΞ²40, AΞ²42 and total AΞ² levels in the limbic region compared to those in the mice injected with rAAV-NEPMT. The partially compensated neprilysin activity was sufficient to achieve a 50% reduction of the elevated AΞ² levels in the neprilysin-deficient mice.Rescue of aged mutant APP tg mice from AΞ² accumulation and subsequent impairment of memory and learning functionWe next investigated the potential of intracardiac injection of rAAV9 vector to reverse the impaired memory and learning function in mutant APP tg mice (APP23)11. Since AΞ² production in APP23 mice is about 10-fold higher than that of wild-type mice, a nearly 4-fold higher dose of vector was used than in the above-mentioned treatment of neprilysin-deficient mice. We examined reference memory as an indication of spatial memory and learning function, using a Morris water maze task. Under our experimental conditions, impairment of reference memory function of mutant APP tg mice was detected at the age of 15 months (Fig. 4a), and so we randomly divided mice of this age into two groups, which were given intracardiac administration of rAAV9-NEPMT or rAAV-NEPWT. Five months after the gene transfer, we re-examined their memory functions. The escape latency of rAAV9-NEPWT-injected APP tg mice was significantly shorter than that of rAAV9-NEPMT-injected mice (*p < 0.05), in which the escape latency was not shortened at all and the learning and memory function remained impaired (Fig. 4b). The cognitive function of the rAAV9-NEPWT-injected APP tg mice was restored nearly to the level of intact wild-type mice. In addition, it is reported that anxiety-like behaviors affect performance in spatial learning tasks12, and we cannot rule out the possibility that the effect of neprilysin gene transfer involved, at least in part, alleviation of anxiety-like behaviors that might have been exacerbated by the amyloid burden.Next, we assessed plaque deposition and glial activation in the brains of rAAV9-injected APP tg mice by positron emission tomography (PET) with radioligands for amyloid (Pittsburgh Compound-B [11C]PIB) and 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) ([11C]Ac5216), respectively (Fig. 4c,d)1314. Plaque deposition in both the hippocampus and neocortex was clearly reduced in the rAAV9-NEPWT-injected mice compared to rAAV9-NEPMT-injected mice (*p < 0.05). Mice treated with rAAV9-NEPWT showed a tendency of enhanced TSPO upregulation, and the TSPO/amyloid burden ratio was significantly different between the two treatment groups (*p < 0.05). This observation is attributable to reinforcement of TSPO-positive, neuroprotective astrogliosis surrounding AΞ² plaques15. Thus, in vivo assessments supported the potential effectiveness of gene therapy by intracardiac administration of rAAV9-NEPWT in a pathological animal model.Therapeutic effects of NEP gene transfer on AΞ² pathologies in the brainAfter PET imaging analysis (i.e., 6 months after the gene transfer), functional expression of neprilysin was estimated by measurement of enzyme activity using a standard fluorescent substrate, and amyloid deposition was assessed by immunohistochemical staining using specific antibodies against either the unmodified amino-terminus of AΞ², N1D, or the modified amino-terminus of AΞ², N3pE16. Neprilysin-dependent endopeptidase activity in both the hippocampus and the neocortex maintained a 1.5-fold increase in the rAAV9-NEPWT-injected mice compared to that in rAAV9-NEPMT-injected mice (*p < 0.05) (Fig. 5a), and both N1D- and N3pE-positive amyloid deposits were consistently and significantly decreased (*p < 0.05) (Fig. 5b,c).We further investigated membrane-associated AΞ² oligomers, which were extracted with Triton X-100 from the membrane fraction, using western blotting (Fig. 5d,e). Membrane-associated AΞ²s were detected as oligomers, consisting mainly of trimers/tetramers, followed by dimer, and with only a trace of monomer. The AΞ² trimers/tetramers, which were not detected from non-tg (wild-type) mouse brain, were significantly decreased by the rAAV9-NEPWT administration (20% reduction; *p < 0.05), compared to that in the rAAV9-NEPMT group. According to the current hypothesis that AΞ² oligomers are the primary molecules responsible for cognitive dysfunction, rather than AΞ² fibrils171819, the reduction of AΞ² oligomers following rAAV9-NEPWT administration may contribute directly to the alleviation of abnormal spatial learning and memory function in aged mutant APP tg mice.
</sections.4>

<sections.5>
Discussion
ecombinant  vectors are among the most promising vehicles for gene delivery to the central nervous system. tereotaxic infusion of  vector carrying neprilysin gene into the hippocampus has been shown to decrease ² in  model mice67. owever, when it was infused into the neocortex or hippocampal formation, expression of exogenous neprilysin and its effects on ² degradation were locally restricted67. ince the extent of the ² burden is broad in , a more efficient and widespread delivery technology is necessary. mong more than one hundred primate s, 9 has gained much attention, showing high efficiency of gene transduction in neurons after intravenous administration in neonatal mice20. ere we showed that intracardiac administration of 9 can deliver neprilysin gene into broad areas of the adult mouse brain, and results in a marked and widespread reduction of ² levels. lthough the mechanism by which 9 penetrates the blood-brain barrier () remains unknown, tyrosine mutation of the adeno-associated viral capsid protein may contribute to the enhanced expression levels of transgenes delivered by 21.
t is noteworthy that a relatively small increase of neprilysin activity in the brain was sufficient to yield a significant reduction of ², with subsequent alleviation of abnormal spatial learning and memory function. he exogenous neprilysin was abundantly present in late and early endosomes of neurons throughout the brain, including the neocortex and hippocampal formation. his localization appears to provide a rationale for the effective degradation of ², as discussed below. t is considered that ² is generated in late endosomes, then is secreted from presynaptic terminals of neurons by neuronal activity-dependent exocytosis22, and is temporally concentrated and may be oligomerized/aggregated. n addition, alsh et al. reported that ² oligomerization occurred after generation of the peptide within specific intracellular vesicles including recycling endosomes23, which could be modulated by ² per se24, and the oligomers are subsequently secreted from the cell. his observation is supported by the fact that the mildly acidic environment (p. H 5 ~ 6) in endosomes appears to promote AΞ² oligomerization/aggregation25. After this event, AΞ² or AΞ² oligomers impair neuronal transmission via binding to N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) or acetylcholine Ξ±7 nicotinic (Ξ±7nACh) receptors and prion protein171819. AΞ²/AΞ² oligomers are diffused in the synaptic clefts after secretion, but they maintain a higher concentration in endosomal membrane, and may also be tethered in part at the plasma membrane. Although neprilysin is a neutral endopeptidase, its pH optimum is around 6.026, so neprilysin could degrade AΞ² oligomers efficiently under the mildly acidic conditions in endosomes.
We succeeded in excluding membrane-associated AΞ² oligomers from the brain by means of neprilysin gene transfer, ameliorating the impairment of spatial learning and memory function, although the contribution of a reduction in the total amount of amyloid deposition cannot be neglected. However, mounting evidence suggests that AΞ² oligomers are highly neurotoxic171819 and may be more directly responsible for the pathological and symptomatic changes in AD, such as synaptic dysfunction and subsequent cognitive dysfunction27. This concept appears to be reinforced by a lesson from the failure of a clinical trial of AΞ² vaccine28, and thus supports the notion that reduction in neprilysin-sensitive and membrane-associated AΞ² oligomers may be the key factor in the alleviation of cognitive impairment.
AΞ² that accumulates and forms amyloid plaques in AD brain consists mostly of amino-terminally truncated and modified AΞ², AΞ²N3pE16, and this implies that AΞ² secreted from neurons undergoes posttranslational modifications in the process of plaque formation. Although this fact has been known for decades, this specific form of AΞ², AΞ²N3pE, has become of interest again since it was reported that PIB probe recognized AΞ²N3pE with higher affinity than it did amino-terminally intact AΞ²1-4213. AΞ²N3pE is more hydrophobic and more easily self-aggregated (250-fold) than AΞ²1-4229, and is more resistant to proteolytic degradation (by 4-fold) (Iwata and Saido, unpublished data). Recently, it was reported that AΞ²N3pE could be a seed for oligomerization/aggregation, and showed more potent neurotoxicity than AΞ²N1D30. Schilling, et al. reported that administration of a synthetic inhibitor specific to glutaminyl cyclase (QC), which is involved in cyclization of the third glutamate residue of AΞ², reduced not only production of AΞ²N3pE, but also the total amount of amyloid deposition, and it also alleviated cognitive impairment in AD-model mice (Tg2576)31. In this study, we found that the gene transfer abolished any increase in amyloid fibrils composed of AΞ²N3pE, as well as amino-terminally intact AΞ², in the brains of aged APP tg mice (APP23). This result may be attributed to degradation of newly produced AΞ² by exogenous neprilysin in endosomes, rather than direct degradation of AΞ²N3pE. Because AΞ²N3pE acquires proteolytic resistance once it is formed from AΞ²1-x, AΞ² degradation in endosomes immediately after its production should be favorable for efficient degradation. This notion appears to be supported by the finding that we could not detect AΞ²N3pE or its oligomeric forms in the membrane fraction (i.e., their concentrations were below the detection limit of western blot analysis)(data not shown).
Therapeutic intervention by neprilysin gene transfer could be monitored in vivo by using microPET with [11C]PIB probe. TSPO is a marker protein in activated glias, such as astrocytes and microglias. Ji et al. reported that most TSPO-positive glial cells in aged APP tg mouse brains were astrocytes, which expressed glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor at a high level1415, suggesting that TSPO-positive astrocytes may play neuroprotective roles in decelerated amyloid plaque formation and alleviation of abnormal spatial learning and memory function. The precise mechanism through which up-regulation of neprilysin activates astrocytes in the brain remains unclear, but neprilysin-generated proteolytic fragments of substrate peptides may be involved in this process.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the new gene delivery system based on rAAV9 with a neuron-specific promoter can achieve functional gene expression throughout the brain, but not in peripheral tissues, after intracardiac administration. In our animal model, it could block AΞ² accumulation and alleviate cognitive dysfunction based on a water maze test. Furthermore, the expression of neprilysin specifically in endosomes is considered to be advantageous for efficient degradation of AΞ² oligomers.
</sections.5>

<sections.6>
Methods
ecombinant  vector production. The AAV vector plasmids contained an expression cassette, consisting of a mouse synapsin I promoter, followed by cDNA encoding neprilysin or its inactive mutant with E585V amino acid substitution, and a woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional regulatory element between the inverted terminal repeats of the AAV3 genome. The synthesized AAV9 vp cDNA sequence was identical to that previously described21, except for the substitution of adenine with thymidine at position 1337, which introduced an amino acid change from tyrosine to phenylalanine at position 44632. The recombinant AAV vectors were produced by transient transfection of HEK293 cells with the vector plasmid, an AAV3 rep and AAV9 vp expression plasmid, and an adenoviral helper plasmid, pHelper (Agilent Technologies), as described previously33. The recombinant viruses were purified by isolation from two sequential continuous CsCl gradients, and the viral titers were determined by qRT-PCR. Before administration, rAAV vectors were diluted in phosphate-buffered saline to 0.5β€“15 Γ— 1011 genome copies/100β€…ΞΌl.AnimalsAll animal experiments were approved by the ethics committee at each institute (Nagasaki University, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, and Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research), and performed in compliance with the institutional guidelines. Wild-type and neprilysin-deficient mice (7β€“9 months old)10 were randomly assigned to rAAV-SynI::NEPWT vector-injected and rAAV-SynI::NEPMT vector-injected groups. One hundred ΞΌl of viral vector solution was injected slowly into circulating blood in the left ventricle of the heart of mice anesthetized with pentobarbital (50β€…mg/kg, ip) over a period of 1β€…min with a 0.5β€…ml syringe equipped with a 29-gauge needle. Male APP transgenic (APP23) mice11 were randomly assigned to two groups at the age of 17 months, when overt abnormality in learning and memory function was observed in the water maze test. They were housed in plastic cages with food (CE2, Clea Japan, Tokyo, Japan) and water ad lib, and were maintained on a 12/12β€…h light-dark cycle (lights on at 09:00, off at 21:00).Immunohistochemistry and quantitative evaluationOne week after amyloid imaging of the vector-injected APP tg mice, the mouse brains were fixed by transcardial perfusion with phosphate-buffered 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Four-ΞΌm-thick sections were mounted onto aminopropyltriethoxysilane-coated glass slides. The brain sections were immunostained using mouse monoclonal anti-neprilysin antibody or mouse monoclonal anti-AΞ² antibody against either unmodified amino-terminus of AΞ², N1D, or modified amino-terminus of AΞ², N3pE, and visualized with AlexaFluor 488-conjugated secondary antibody. The sections were observed with a fluorescence microscope, BZ-9000 (Keyence, Osaka, Japan), using a Γ—2 or a Γ—4 objective with 1.3Γ— digital zoom, and digital images were captured with a digital microscope camera (Keyence) and saved as digitized tagged-image format files to retain maximum resolution. The density of immunoreactive AΞ² deposits in the hippocampal formation and neocortex was measured using image analysis software, MetaMorph, ver. 7.7 (Universal Imaging Corporation, Downington, PA), by an investigator blinded as to sample identity. To reduce the variance among tissue sections, we used the average of data from 4 sections per mouse as an individual value.In addition to AΞ² immunolabeling, multiple immunofluorescence staining was performed as described previously34. For double staining of neprilysin and cell or organelle marker proteins (NeuN, GFAP, MAP2, tau, syntaxin-1, SV2A, VAMP-1, PSD95, Rab3a, Rab5, Rab7, Rab9, Clathrin, EEA1, Syntaxin-6), brain sections from neprilysin-deficient mice administered with rAAV9-SynI::NEP were first immunostained using a fluorescence-direct TSA method (Texas-Red-conjugated streptoavidin) combined with anti-neprilysin mouse monoclonal antibody, and then with rabbit polyclonal anti-marker protein antibodies and AlexaFluor 488-conjugated secondary antibody or EnVision plus system HRP-labeled polymer anti-rabbit antibody. The sections were observed under an Axio observer Z1 inverted microscope incorporating a confocal laser scanning system LSM710 with argon, helium/neon (G) and helium/neon (R) lasers (Carl Zeiss Japan, Tokyo, Japan). Alexa 488 and Texas-red were excited with 488β€…nm and 543β€…nm laser beams, and observed through 510β€“530β€…nm, and 560β€“600β€…nm band pass emission filters, respectively. All of the single images were acquired by quintuple scans with ZEN2008, ver. 5.0 software (Carl Zeiss Japan) using a Γ—63 oil immersion objective, then merged and saved as digitized tagged-image format files to retain maximum resolution.Behavioral analysisFive months after the injection of rAAV vector into APP tg mice, the Morris water maze test was conducted as previously reported5, with minor modifications. Further details are available in the online supplementary information.In vivo imaging of amyloid and glial activationPositron emission tomographic (PET) scans were conducted for APP tg mice at 20 months of ageas described elsewhere1314 with a microPET Focus 220 animal scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Knoxville, TN) designed for small animals, which provides 95 transaxial slices 0.815β€…mm (center-to-center) apart, a 19.0-cm transaxial field of view (FOV) and a 7.6-cm axial FOV35. Prior to the scans, the mice were anesthetized with 1.5% (v/v) isoflurane. Further details are available in the online supplementary information.Assay of neprilysin-dependent neutral endopeptidase activityHippocampal formations and cerebral cortices were homogenized in five volumes (w/v) of 50β€…mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6) containing 150β€…mM NaCl, protease inhibitor cocktail (EDTA-free Completeβ„Ά, Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) supplemented with 0.7β€…ΞΌg/ml pepstatin A (4397, Peptide Institute, Osaka, Japan) with a Potter-Elvehjem-type grinder (Wheaton, Millville, NJ). The homogenates were centrifuged at 70,000β€…rpm and 4Β°C for 29β€…min using an Optima TL ultracentrifuge and a TLA100.4 rotor (Beckman, Palo Alto, CA). The pellet was solubilized with the above buffer containing 1% Triton X-100 (membrane fraction). NEP-dependent neutral endopeptidase activity in the membrane fraction was fluorometrically assayed using an indirect coupled enzyme assay method. The standard assay mixture consisted of 4β€“6β€…ΞΌg of membrane fraction, 0.1β€…mM succinyl-Ala-Ala-Phe-AMC (I-1315; Bachem, Bubendorf, Switzerland) as a substrate, and 100β€…mM MES buffer (pH 6.5) in a total volume of 50β€…ΞΌL. The reaction was initiated by addition of substrate to the assay mixture, and performed for 1β€…h at 37Β°C. To the reaction mixture was then added 2.5β€…ΞΌL of a solution containing 0.1β€…mg (0.4 units equivalent)/mL leucine aminopeptidase (L-5006; Sigma, St Louis, MO) and 0.2β€…mM phosphoramidon (4082; Peptide Institute), followed by further incubation for 30β€…min at 37Β°C to remove the phenylalanine residue from Phe-AMC generated by neutral endopeptidase-catalyzed digestion. The intensity of the liberated 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin was measured with excitation at 390β€…nm and emission at 460β€…nm on a 96-well half-area-black half-well plate using a microplate spectrometer Infinite M-1000 (Tecan Group Ltd., MΓ¤nnedorf, Switzerland). The NEP-dependent neutral endopeptidase activity was determined, based on the decrease in rate of digestion caused by 10β€…ΞΌM thiorphan (T-6031; Sigma), a specific inhibitor of NEP36. Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL).AΞ² quantitationThe cerebral cortices and hippocampi were processed according to the method reported previously6. The amounts of AΞ²x-40 and AΞ²x-42 in each fraction were determined by sandwich ELISA (Wako, Osaka, Japan).Western blottingThe Triton X-100-extractable membrane fraction of hippocampi was used for analysing levels of AΞ² oligomers and monomers. Protein concentrations were determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). An equivalent amount of protein from hippocampus of each animal was mixed with a 2Γ— sample buffer without a reducing agent, separated by 5β€“20% gradient SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred electrophoretically to a 0.22β€…ΞΌm nitrocellulose membrane (ProtoranΒ®, Whatman GmbH, Dassel, Germany). The membrane was boiled in PBS for 3β€…min to achieve high sensitivity. The blot was probed with anti-rabbit polyclonal antibody against either unmodified amino-terminus of AΞ², N1D (1β€…ΞΌg/ml) or modified amino-terminus of AΞ², N3pE (1β€…ΞΌg/ml)16, followed by HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (GE Healthcare, Tokyo). Immunoreactive bands on the membrane were visualized with an enhanced chemiluminescence kit (GE Healthcare), and the band intensities were determined with a densitometer, LAS4000 (Fuji Photo Film, Tokyo, Japan) using Science Lab 97 Image Gauge software (ver. 3.0.1; Fuji Photo Film). Immunoreactive protein content in each sample was calculated based on a standard curve constructed with synthesized AΞ² (Peptide Institute, Osaka, Japan). Each set of experiments was repeated at least two times. The blots were reprobed with anti-Ξ²-actin (AC-15, Sigma) antibody to confirm that equal amounts of total protein had been extracted.Statistical analysisAll data were expressed as means Β± s.e.m. For comparisons of the means between two groups, statistical analysis was performed by applying Student's t test after confirming equality of variances of the groups. If the variances were unequal, Mann-Whitney U-test was performed (SigmaPlot software, ver.12.3, Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA). Comparisons of the means among more than three groups were done by a one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or repeated-measures ANOVA followed by a post-hoc test (SigmaPlot software). P values of less than 0.05 were considered to be significant.Details for antibodies used in this study are available in the online supplementary information.
</sections.6>

<sections.7>
Author ontributions
.. designed and prepared the  vectors; .. and . ekiguchi performed the in vivo experiments, .., .., .., .. performed biochemical and histochemical analyses; .. and .. performed the  imaging analysis; . taufenbiel provided  tg mice; .., .., .., . taufenbiel and ... designed the experimental plan and wrote the manuscript.Author Contributions
S.M. designed and prepared the AAV vectors; N.I. and M. Sekiguchi performed the in vivo experiments, N.I., Y.H., A.T., M.A. performed biochemical and histochemical analyses; B.J. and M.H. performed the PET imaging analysis; M. Staufenbiel provided APP tg mice; N.I., S.M., M.H., M. Staufenbiel and T.C.S. designed the experimental plan and wrote the manuscript.
</sections.7>

<sections.8>
Supplementary aterial
upplementary nformation. Supplementary information
</sections.8>

</text>
