<title>
Cooperative effect of hepatocyte growth factor and fibronectin in anchorage-independent survival of mammary carcinoma cells: requirement for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Anchorage-independent survival and growth are critical characteristics of malignant cells. We showed previously that the addition of exogenous hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and the presence of fibronectin fibrils stimulate anchorage-independent colony growth of a murine mammary carcinoma, SP1, which expresses both HGF and HGF receptor (Met; R. Saulnier et al., Exp. Cell Res., 222: 360-369, 1996). We now show that tyrosine phosphorylation of Met in carcinoma cells is augmented by cell adhesion and spreading on fibronectin substratum. In contrast, detached serum-starved cells exhibit reduced tyrosine phosphorylation of Met and undergo apoptotic cell death within 18-24 h. Under these conditions, the addition of HGF stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of Met and restores survival of carcinoma cells. Soluble fibronectin also stimulates cell survival and shows a cooperative survival response with HGF but does not affect tyrosine phosphorylation of Met; these results indicate that fibronectin acts via a pathway independent of Met in detached cells. We demonstrated previously that inhibition of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase activity blocks HGF-induced DNA synthesis of carcinoma cells (N. Rahimi et al., J. Biol. Chem., 271: 24850-24855, 1996). We now show in detached cells a cooperative effect of HGF and FN in the activation of PI 3-kinase and on the phosphorylation of PKB/Akt at serine 473. PI 3-kinase activity is also required for the HGF- and fibronectin-induced survival responses, as well as anchorage-independent colony growth. However, c-Src kinase or MEK1/2 activities are not required for the cell survival effect. Together, these results demonstrate that the PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway is a key effector of the HGF- and fibronectin-induced survival response of breast carcinoma cells under detached conditions and corroborate an interaction between integrin and HGF/ Met signalling pathways in the development of invasive breast cancer.
</abstract>

</text>
