<title>
Periovulatory expression of hydrogen peroxide-induced sulfiredoxin and peroxiredoxin 2 in the rat ovary: gonadotropin regulation and potential modification.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Reactive oxygen species are involved in ovulation. The aim of this study was to examine gonadotropin regulation of antioxidant enzyme sulfiredoxin (Srx) and peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2) expressions and modification during the ovulatory process in rats. Administration of antioxidants in vivo reduced ovulation rate and cumulus expansion. LH treatment increased H(2)O(2) levels within 15 min, which, in turn, induced Srx gene expression in cultured preovulatory follicles. Treatment of preovulatory follicles with catalase suppressed the stimulatory effect of LH on Akt phosphorylation. LH- or H(2)O(2)-stimulated Srx mRNA levels were suppressed by inhibitors of antioxidant agents and MAPK kinase. An in vivo injection of equine chorionic gonadotropin-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulated Srx mRNA within 1 h in granulosa but not thecal cells of preovulatory follicles. Srx protein levels were stimulated from 3 h post-hCG injection. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that oocytes expressed the Srx protein. Furthermore, hCG treatment increased Srx expression in mural granulosa, theca and cumulus cells, but the Srx protein was not detected in corpora lutea. Gene expression of PRDX2, identified as an Srx-dependent modified enzyme, was stimulated by gonadotropins. In situ hybridization analysis demonstrated that PRDX2 mRNA was detected in oocytes and theca cells as well as granulosa cells of some antral and preovulatory follicles. High levels of PRDX2 mRNA were detected in corpora lutea. Total levels of PRDX2 protein were not changed by gonadotropins. However, levels of hyperoxidized PRDX2 increased within 2-3 h after the hCG injection. Taken together, gonadotropin stimulation of Srx expression and PRDX2 modification in the ovary suggest the existence of an antioxidant system to maintain H(2)O(2) production and elimination during the periovulatory period.
</abstract>

</text>
