<title>
Induction of hemeoxygenase-1 expression after inhibition of hemeoxygenase activity promotes inflammation and worsens ischemic brain damage in mice.
</title>

<text>

<abstract>
Hemeoxygenase (HO) is an enzymatic system that degrades heme. HO-1 is an inducible isoform whereas HO-2 is constitutive. Stroke strongly induces HO-1 expression but the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. Cytokines that are up-regulated after ischemia, like interleukin (IL)-10, can induce HO-1 gene expression, which is positively regulated by the transcriptional activator nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and negatively regulated by the transcriptional repressor breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) associated C-terminal helicase 1 (Bach-1). While Nrf2 is activated after ischemia and drugs promoting Nrf2 activation increase HO-1 and are beneficial, the involvement of Bach-1 is unknown. Here we investigated mechanisms involved in HO-1 induction and evaluated the effects of HO activity inhibition in mouse permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). HO-1 was induced after ischemia in IL-10-deficient mice suggesting that post-ischemic HO-1 induction was IL-10-independent. Attenuation of Bach-1 gene repression after ischemia was associated to enhanced HO-1 induction. Administration of the HO activity inhibitor zinc proto-porphyrin IX (ZnPP) i.p. 24h before pMCAO exacerbated ischemia-induced tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and IL-1β, nitro-oxidative stress, and the presence of neutrophils at 8h, and increased infarct volume at day 4. However, ZnPP did not worsen ischemic damage when given 30min before pMCAO. ZnPP induced HO-1 expression in the cerebral vasculature at 24h, when it was still detected by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in plasma. While ZnPP was not found in brain tissue extracts of controls, it could be detected after ischemia, supporting that a small fraction of the injected drug can reach the tissue following blood-brain barrier breakdown. The deleterious effect of inhibiting HO activity in ischemia became apparent in the presence of ZnPP-induced HO-1, which is known to exert effects independent of its enzymatic activity. In conclusion, HO-1 induction after ischemia was associated to down-regulation of transcriptional repressor Bach-1, and induction of HO-1 when HO enzymatic activity was inhibited was related to worst outcome after brain ischemia.
</abstract>

</text>
